CIVIC 
EDUCATION
Grade 10
Educational Publications Department

ii 
First Print  - 2014
Second Print - 2015
Third Print - 2016
Forth Print - 2017
Fifth Print  - 2019
All Rights Reserved
ISBN 978-955-25-0197-5
Published by Educational Publications Department
Printed by : 
S&S Printers (Pvt) Ltd.
No 49, Jayantha Weerasekara Mawatha,
Colombo 10.
iii
The National Anthem of Sri Lanka
 Sri Lanka Matha
 Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
 Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka
 Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya 
 Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha
 Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha
 Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
 Oba we apa vidya
 Obamaya apa sathya
 Oba we apa shakthi
  Apa hada thula bhakthi
 Oba apa aloke 
  Apage anuprane
 Oba apa jeevana we 
 Apa mukthiya oba we
 Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha
 Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara
 Eka mavakage daru kela bevina
 Yamu yamu vee nopama
 Prema vada sema bheda durerada
 Namo, Namo Matha
 Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
ivwms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjda
tl ksjfiys fjfikd
tl mdge;s tl reêrh fõ
wm lh ;=< ÿjkd
tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhda
tl f,i tys jefvkd
Ôj;a jk wm fuu ksjfia
fid¢k isáh hq;= fõ
ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkS
fj<S iu.s oñkS
rka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;d
lsis l, fkdu Èrkd
- wdkkao iurfldaka -
J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®
Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®
|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®
Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®
AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®
JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ® 
|ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷»
|»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ
¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hß
JØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀ
ö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á
¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.
  BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß
  PÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.
vBeing innovative, changing with right knowledge
Be a light to the country as well as to the world.
Message from the Hon. Minister of Education
 The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that 
took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the 
rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The 
manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such 
an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative 
career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of Sri 
Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all. 
 This book is a product of free education. Y our aim must be to use this book properly 
and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide 
free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.
 Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a 
country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes 
of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive 
citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim. 
 
 It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your 
education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure 
that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.
 I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured 
citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.  
Akila Viraj Kariyawasam
 Minister of Education
viForeword 
The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex 
along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning 
and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological 
differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook 
by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in 
order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the 
learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that 
contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, 
to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.
The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you about 91 
textbooks from grades 6-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum 
use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would 
assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality 
who would be a valuable asset to the country.
I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards 
as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer 
this textbook to you. 
W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,
Commissioner General of Educational Publications,
Educational Publications Department,
Isurupaya,
Battaramulla.
2019.04.10  
viiMonitoring and Supervision  
W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka             -  Commissioner General of Educational Publications
      Educational Publications Department
Direction         
W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli              -  Commissioner of Educational Publications 
      (Development)
      Educational Publications Department
Co-ordination 
Dakshina Kasturiarachchi                         -  Assistant Commissioner
      Educational Publications Department
W.A.N. Darshi Ranasinha              -  Assistant Commissioner
      Educational Publications Department
Writer Board
Dr. W. M. Shaminda Wanasinha             - Lecturer, The Open University of Sri Lanka, Nawala
M. K. Kingsley Priyantha              - Lecturer, Ruhuna National College of Education,   
                                                                        Walahanduwa
K.D.D. Percival               - Retired Senior Lecturer
     National Institute of Education
I.A.M. Afsan               - Assistant Commissioner
     Educational Publications Department
H.H. Aruna Indrasena              - In-Service-Advisor, Zonal Education Office 
     Balangoda
C. S. Jayasinha               - Manager (Retired), Teacher Center, Horana
K.A. Nilantha Pushpakumara             - Teacher Service, Polegoda Maha Vidyalaya
L.A. Shalika Jayawardhane             - Teacher Service, Imbulana Maha Vidyalaya
Editor Board
Prof. P. Athukorala                - University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Dr. D.P.S. Chandrakumara              - Senior Lecturer
     University of Sri Jayewardenepura 
Dhamma Dissanayaka               - Senior Lecturer, Department of Political Science and   
     Public Policy, University of Colombo
A.L.S. Abeywickrama              - Senior Lecturer
     National Institute of Education 
Darshi Ranasingha              - Assistant Commissioner
                  Educational Publications Department
Final Evaluation
Wasantha Senavirathna              - Senior Lecturer Lawyer, Department of Public and   
     International Law, University of Colombo   
Technical Assistance
A. Asha Amali Weerarathna             - IT Unit
                  Educational Publications Department
viii
ix 
Index
1'  Democratic Governance  1 -  28
2' Decentralisation and  
 devolution of power 29 - 52
3' The multicultural society 53 - 63
4' Economic systems and  
 economic relations64 - 88
5' Conflict resolution in a  
 democratic society89 - 104

1
For free distributionDemocratic Governance 01
Democracy is accepted globally as a more desirable method of good governance. 
The main reason for this is that democratic government is based on people’s 
participation and it represents public opinion. In this chapter, you will be able to 
study the system of democratic government relevant to the following topics:
 ²Origin and the expansion of democratic governance
 ² Characteristics of democratic governance
 ²Nature of the state and the government
 ² Nature of the national state, its origin and expansion
 ²Role of the state
 ²Nature of constitutions and their characteristics
 ²Organizational structure and the performance of the government
 ²Responsibilities of citizen
 ²Responsibilities towards citizen
 ²Requirements for the success of democratic governance
 ²Importance of democratic governance 
Introduction to democratic governance 
 In the long history of civilization, man used to live together with a view of 
facilitating the fulfillment of his basic needs. With the gradual development of 
society, the need arose for an organized system of governance to facilitate the weal 
of society and safeguard law and order.
 Accordingly, various countries have practised different methods of 
governance to rule them from the past. Monarchism (federal), aristocratic system 
and democratic governance can be cited as examples. At present, most countries 
including Sri Lanka are implementing democratic governance. 
2
For free distribution
Democracy
 In Sinhala,“praja” means people while “tantra” is the system of governance. 
“vadaya” is the ideology. Accordingly, democratic governance is the governance 
developed by the public to govern themselves.
If you consider the Tamil word ‘Makkaladchi’, ‘Makkal’, means people 
and ‘adchi’ means governance. In that sense, Makkaladchi simply means public 
governance.
The word ‘democracy ’ is derived from the Greek words ‘Demos’ and ‘Kratos’. 
‘Demos’ denotes public while ‘Kratos’ denotes power. So the Greek meaning of 
the word is power of  the people. The system of government which allows people to 
participate in the administration directly and indirectly is democratic government.
The origin and the expansion of democratic governance
 
 There is historical evidence to show that some features of democratic 
governance had existed in both the East and the West.
Fig 1.2 - Parthinan Accropolis Athens Greece
 Fig 1.1 - Caryatides arena-Athens Greece
 The governance of the Greek city-state (polis) of Athens was based on direct 
democratic principles. The supreme governing body of the city-state of Athens was 
the Citizen's Council that consisted of citizens in the government in Greece. The 
citizens' opinion on the functions of government have been directly considered in 
the Citizen's Council. Therefore, the citizens were given an opportunity to take an 
active part in the government. But urban women, slaves and foreigners were not 
allowed to participate in it. This method of governance in Athens was recognized 
as direct democratic governance. Collective decision making can be cited as direct 
democratic governance. 
3
For free distribution History records about a republican government in the “Vajji” kingdom of  
India in the sixth century B.C. The seven principles of “Aparihani Dhamma” of 
Vajji kingdom can be seen in the present democratic governance too. Some of them 
are given below.
 ²Regular meetings and discussion. 
 ²Meet, discuss and leave peacefully.
 ²Avoid framing of non-functional laws, strict enforcement of framed laws, and  
obedience to framed laws.
 ²Respect elders, obey and respect their advice and abide by them.
 Accordingly, this shows how the East followed the principles of democracy 
in their governments.
 From 5th century A.D. up to the 15th century A.D. the feudal system existed 
in Europe. After the 15th century A.D. the advancement of commercial economy 
took place replacing the agricultural economy which was based on service bound 
land use. At the same time, a capitalist class also emerged. After the 15th century 
A.D. national states came into existence in Europe. With the spread of liberal ideas, 
the freedom of the individual was greatly appreciated.
 The power of the people’s representatives took precedence over that of the 
monarchy. The English Revolution (Great Revolution) that took place in 1688 is 
an example of this. Later, the power of the Parliament which consisted of people’s 
representatives began to develop.
Types of democratic governance
When we inquire about democratic governance, two main types of it can be noticed. 
 ²Direct democracy
 ²Indirect democracy (Representative Democracy) 
Direct democracy
The governance which existed in the Greek city-state (polis) of Athens is a good 
example of direct democracy.
Direct democracy is the system in which people gather in one place, discuss 
and take collective decisions on state administrative functions with the 
consent of the people swiftly and directly.      
       - Professor Garner
4
For free distributionThe problems arising out of implementing direct democracy at present,
 ²The large land masses of present states
 ²Vast population of present states
 ²The difficulty of getting all the citizens to rally in one place 
 ²Complexity of social needs
Indirect democracy
 Considering the practical problems in implementing direct democratic 
governance, the system  of elected representatives emerged. It is called indirect 
democracy or representative democracy.
Indirect democracy took root in Europe as an instrument of administration. 
Philosophic ideas nurtured it further. As a result, representative institutions such as 
the Parliament came into being.
“Democracy is, government of the people by the people and for 
the people”
      - Abraham Lincoln - 
“Democracy provides rights for everybody as a tool of governance”
        - Sealer - 
In  a representative democracy, the citizens themselves cannot take part in the 
governance. The opinion of the voters is directly assessed in some countries where 
representative democracy is practised.
The referendum in the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of 
Sri Lanka, is one such example.
Importance of democracy as a system of governance  
 Most of the present states consist of multicultural societies. In such a society, 
every member of the population can become a partner in the mechanism of 
governance. 
 In most countries, government bodies have been established to enable 
people’s representation at both national and local levels.
 ²Democracy is useful as a system of government, as it builds up on the people’s 
will. The representative is elected on the majority will.
 ² The government is formed by the party or group which elects the majority of 
representatives.
 ² The laws are passed by the majority decision of the elected representatives.
5
For free distribution
The importance of democracy as a way of living  
 Democracy plays a major role in society and as a way of living. A democratic 
society respects different opinions, taking decisions by consensus, respecting 
equality while enjoying rights and fulfilling related duties.
  A society which adheres to such conditions automatically creates 
opportunities for the smooth implementation of democracy.
 Activities
 ²List the basic qualities of direct democracy which were followed in 
Athens, Greece.
 ²Taking the definition of representative democracy in the text into 
consideration, draft a simple definition.
 ²Prepare a note which contains the qualities that one should develop as  
a member of a democratic society.
Characteristics of democratic governance 
Election of governments and rulers using universal franchise 
 In a democratic country, ruling representatives are elected by general 
franchise. Moreover, franchise is utilized in referendums in direct democracies.
   Franchise is bestowed on all the citizens over a particular age limit. V oting 
power is granted irrespective of sex, community, employment or income. It is 
known as universal franchise.
  In article 3 of the constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri 
Lanka, it is mentioned that;
 In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the people and 
is inalienable. Sovereignty includes the power of government, 
fundamental rights and the franchise.
6
For free distribution
 Activity
Mention the elections in which the Sri Lankan voter is entitled to universal 
franchise.
Competitive party system
 
 
       Political parties are an essential component in the operation of democratic 
government.  
A political party, is an organized entity of persons formed with the aim of 
acquiring ruling  power of a country based on principles of its governance.
The opportunity given to a number of competitive parties to gain political 
power in a country is called competitive party system. It can be noticed that, they are 
in constant competition to acquire power presenting various political and economic 
programmes. Accordingly, the people can select their party on their own.Fig 1.3 - Polling center
7
For free distributionDifferent types of party systems can be identified in this manner;
Multi-party 
SystemA large number of political parties are 
in operation. Sri Lanka and India are 
countries where Multi-party system 
operates.
Two-Party 
SystemSeveral parties are in operation but the 
mandate changes from time to time between 
two parties. Examples - Great Britain, U.S.A.
Single Party
 SystemThere is only one political party legally 
operating within the country. Its function 
based on socialist philosophy. Examples - 
China, Cuba, North Korea
Good characteristics of a competitive party system
 ²Wide opportunity for representing public opinion
 ²Prevention of autocracy
 ²Correction of the unhealthy policies of a government through criticism
 ²Provision of the opportunity to represent the diversity that exists in society
 ²Creation of unity out of diversity
 Activity
 ²Explain the service rendered by the multi-party system in a democratic 
government.
 ² Name the several political parties active in the following countries.
Great Britain India Sri Lanka
------------------------
------------------------
------------------------
------------------------------------------------
------------------------
------------------------
------------------------------------------------
------------------------
------------------------
------------------------
8
For free distribution
Polling division system
 It is necessary to divide the country into polling divisions as a strategy 
to involve people’s representatives for democratic governance. Based on these 
divisions representatives are elected to the legislature and local governments. The 
simple majority representation and the system of proportional representation are 
followed mostly in electing members at present. 
 According to the constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of              
Sri Lanka, polling divisions are divided by the  Delimitation Commission. For this 
purpose, the land and population are taken as the main criteria.
\
 10 - Jaffna
11 - Vanni
17 - Anuradhpura 
4 - Kandy5 - Matale 15 - KurunegalaPuttalam 
12 - Batticalo 18 - Polonnaruwa
20 -Monaragala
21 - Ratnapura
7 -Galle9 -Hambantota2 -
Gampaha14 -
Trincomalee
22 -
Kegalla6 -
Nuwara 
Eliya19 -
Badulla13 -
Digamadulla
3 -
Kaluthara
8 -
  MataraColombo
Fig 1.4 -  The map of electoral districts in Sri Lanka16 - 
1 - The electoral map of Sri Lanka is given below as an example.
9
For free distribution
Benefits of electing representatives based on the polling 
divisisions
 ²Opportunity for electing representatives to represent public opinion 
irrespective of differences that exist in the society like race, religion, language 
or caste.
 ²Provide the opportunity to elect leaders necessary to maintain the political 
process
 ²Provide opportunity for the people to elect a representative responsible for 
the division
 ²Providing an opportunity for regional development
 Activity
 ²Name the electoral district of your residence.
 ²How many representatives are elected for the district?
 ²How many districts is Sri Lanka divided into?
Free and fair elections 
 Electing representatives to government bodies is a cornerstone in a 
democratic country. Similarly elections give the opportunity for the government to 
obtain the participation of the people in administrative functions.
  Elections are essential for the existence of democracy and holding free and 
fair elections is also an essential factor. The voters must be able to choose a political 
party or a group and vote freely. Candidates too should be able to engage in the 
election process freely.
Characteristics of a free and fair election
 ² Holding elections in due course
 ²All the eligible citizens must be assured of their vote/candidacy in a free and 
fair manner
 ²Confirmation of the right to participate in a free and fair election. 
 ²Holding elections in line with the election laws
 ²Holding elections in a peaceful environment.
10
For free distributionActivity 
 ² Three rights of a voter in a democratic country are given below in the 
first column. Mention three duties related to a free and fair election in 
the second column.
Column  ΙΙ Column  Ι
Duties related to the rights Rights of a voter
1.V oting
----------------------------------- 2. Participation in election  
    propaganda meetings
----------------------------------- 3. Addressing election rallies
Existence of a government and an opposition 
 In an election for the selection of representatives for government bodies, the 
party which wins a majority of representatives becomes the government in a 
democratic system of government. Administration rests with the government. At an 
election, the party or parties which get a minority of representatives forms the 
opposition. 
The role of the opposition to make the democratic system of 
administration successful 
 ² Assist the government in their good activities.
 ² Direct the government in the proper path by way of investigation and 
constructive criticism
 ²Oppose the government in anti-democratic policies and actions
 ²Act to establish a better alternative government
 Activity 
Explain in brief how the opposition can assist the government to render 
better service to the people.
11
For free distribution
Freedom, equality and rights 
 In simple terms, the state in which an individual is allowed to fulfill political, 
economic and social needs can be defined as ‘freedom’. 
 In simple terms,  freedom is the opportunity for developing one’s personality 
sans external resistance.
        - G.D.H. Cole -  
   
 It is very important that this freedom is enjoyed so as to cause no hindrance 
or obstacle to the other members of society.  Freedom can only be enjoyed within 
the boundaries of law.
 The freedom that the individual gets to consummate his life, contributes in 
general to the progress of society as a whole.
 Providing every individual with equal opportunities is equality. What 
is implied here is the provision of opportunities for the enjoyment of rights and 
freedom to everyone without any discrimination.
 Execution of qualities such as freedom and equality depends on safeguarding 
rights. Rights can be interpreted as the entitlements of humans given by society to 
consummate his social life
 Human rights can be defined as the entitlements unfavoured by any means 
which humans receive at birth to lead a prestigious life in society.
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was proclaimed by the United 
Nations General Assembly on 10th  December 1948. This is an important instance in 
the history of winning human rights. By this, human rights were legalized.
 Entertaining the rights of a person properly results in leading a healthy 
social life. The intention of providing rights in a democratic society is to develop 
the whole society through personal development. Social development is established 
by performing duties combined with rights. Education is one example of the rights 
you are entitled to. It is your responsibility to dedicate knowledge and skills gained 
through education for social development. 
12
For free distributionActivities
Mention obligations a citizen should fulfil in column II for the rights in 
column I
 column I     column II
Obligations attached to rights Rights
----------------------------------- Right to peaceful assembly
----------------------------------- Right to education
----------------------------------- Right to work and to receive equal 
wages for equal work
 ²Mention moral obligations that you should fulfill to wards your parents 
and elders.
Act in accordance with the constitution
 
 The basic law of a country is the constitution. Under a democratic system of 
administration, governance of the country takes place in conformity with the 
constitution.
 The constitution is a document which defines the formation, the execution 
and the powers of the major component of a government, which are the 
legislature, executive and the judiciary  and describes the relationship 
between the said institutions with the people.
      - Professor Ivor Jennings -
Though there is no consensus about the contents of a constitution. But, most of 
the constitutions consist of the following;
 ²How the major components of the government, the legislature, 
executive and the judiciary are constructed  
 ²The tasks, powers and the relationships in the said institutions  
 ²The nature of the relationship between the government and the people
 ²Fundamental  rights of the people
 ²Provision to amend the constitution
13
For free distribution
Benefits of adherence to  the constitution in a democratic 
country
 ²Ensures the regularity and the consistency of the administration
 ²Awareness of people’s rights by both rulers and subjects
 ²Possibility of preventing rulers being arbitrary 
 ²Protection of the sovereignty of the judiciary
 ²Protection of fundamental rights
 ² Fulfillment of necessities  and aspirations of the people from government 
institutions
 ²Equal treatment under law for every one
Media freedom and the right of access to information  
 The people of a democratic country have freedom of expression and access 
to information. This is fulfilled by the media. Media is the main factor in forming 
public opinion. 
 The people have  a right to know about the activities and the decision making 
process of the government. It is  an essential factor of good governance. Likewise 
the media has the ability to make the government aware of  public opinion. 
 Media freedom is of paramount importance in a democratic country to form 
public opinion.
The role of the free media in a democratic country
 ²Presenting true and correct information to the public
 ²Presenting unbiased information for the benefit of the people
 ²Making the government aware of the grievances of the people
 ²Direct the rulers to follow the path of democracy
 ²Enhance the knowledge of the people 
 ²Providing the latest information on time
14
For free distributionActivity 
Prepare a list of ethics for the media in providing day to day information 
to the public.
Independence of the judiciary
 The judiciary plays the role of dispensing justice. In a democratic society 
the judiciary plays a major role in safeguarding freedom and protection of rights.
 The judiciary should be independent and  free from the influence of the   
legislature and the executive, and any other aspects. Constitutions of modern states 
have taken numerous steps to protect the sovereignty of the judiciary. Independence 
of the judiciary ensures that equity and justice is meted out to the people as well as 
judiciary.
   Establishment of the Judicial Service Commission is one of the important 
steps with regards to independence of Judiciary.
The supremacy of law and equality before law
In a country, law is above all. It is the supremacy of the law. It is compulsory 
that both the rulers as well as subjects must obey and respect the law. They should not 
over rule the law. It should be practised equally for both the rulers and subjects. 
The application of law irrespective of nationality, caste, creed, or sex or an 
individual basis is in brief called equality before law.
Features that illustrate the supremacy of law
 ²Everybody to respect the law, obedient to the law and not superseding it
 ² Punishing the offenders under the existing law
 ²Arresting individuals only on the basis of an indictment
 ²Equality before law.
 ²Everybody to get the protection of law in absolute fairness
Activity 
Mention two provisions vested for the protection of the sovereignty of the 
judiciary in the constitution of Sri Lanka.
15
For free distribution
Nature of the state and the government 
The State
 While the state is a permanent institution, the government is an institution 
subject to changes from time to time. Present state is considered a national state, 
and there are four basic characteristics evident in such a state. They are land, 
population, government and autonomous power. 
Land
 ²Land area is demarcated by fixed frontiers.
 ²The maritime boundary. 
 ²The sky above the land area.
Population
 ²The population living within the land limits.
Government
 ²Safeguarding law and order and motivating people to fulfill common goals 
within the state are entrusted to the government. 
Autonomous power
 ²Autonomous power is the authority that can be applied for the sake of the 
public without the intervention of any particular internal or external force. 
Autonomous power helps in enacting laws and in obtaining the allegiance of 
the public to such laws.
Definitions presented about the state
  “ The state is a community of persons more or less numerous, 
permanently occupying a definite portion of territory, independent 
of external control and possessing an organized government to 
which the great body of inhabitants render habitual obedience ”
          - Professor Garner - 
 “ The state is an organization established by the people to live    
   happily and honourably  ”
        - Aristotle - 
16
For free distribution
Nature of the nation state
The nation state was established in Europe as a political organization  after the 15th 
century.
Main features of a nation state
 ²Based on the concept of one state for one nation
 ² Consists of supreme power, land, population and the government
 ² Governed by a professional hierarchy of authorities
 ²Possession of supreme power regarding external and internal matters
Origin and the expansion of the nation state
 After the 15th century the formation of nation states commenced. England, 
Spain and France were the first nation states. Then Germany and  Italy too joined.
By the 20th century nation states existed all over the world.
Reasons behind the origin of nation states
 ²Protestant reformation
 ²The great revolution
 ²The rise of capitalist economy  with the collapse of the feudal system
 ²Development of scientific knowledge
 The required religious background was provided by protestant reformists. 
The political thinkers like Nicolo Machiaveli, Jin Bodan and Thomas Hobbs 
strengthened the nation state.
 Countries like England, France, Holland  and Portugal emerged as strong 
countries owing to several reasons. Some of them are,
 ²National cohesion
 ²Military and Naval strength
 ²Advanced economic condition
 ²Creative abilities of these nations
The role of the nation state
 Modern nation states have emerged as big and small  landmarks. Likewise, 
some have a large population while others have a small population. Taking the land 
areas and population into consideration, it is possible to imagine the complexity 
17
For free distributionof the social, political and economic problems. Economic inequalities and racial 
differences are some such examples. The nation state is bound to solve these 
problems safeguarding basic human rights, social justice and equality.
  Accordingly, given below are examples of the tasks that devolve upon the 
Government.
 ² Protection of law and peace
 ²Maintaining economic and political stability
 ² Providing welfare services
 ²Taking steps for poverty alleviation
 ² Maintenance of public services
 ²Implementation of development plans
 ²Solving problems of war, rebellion  and ethnic disputes
 ²Protecting basic human rights and their development
Activity 
Prepare an article suitable for  a wallpaper presenting examples of actions taken 
by Sri Lanka as a state, to alleviate poverty and provide social welfare services.
Main forms of states
 As given in the constitution, the devolution of power between the central 
government and the local government bodies, the states are categorized as follows.
 01. Unitary state
   02.  Federal state
Unitary state
 Unitary states are states where power is concentrated with central 
governments to implement the legislative, executive, and the judicial power. 
 In a unitary state, local  governments implement the administrative powers 
vested by the central government. (further details are given in chapter 2)
Federal state 
 A federal state is a s ystem of government with two tiers of governments.
 Here, both the central government and local government bodies exercise 
the powers of the legislature, executive and the judiciary. (A detailed clarification 
is given in the second chapter.)
18
For free distributionBasic aspects of a federal state
• Devolution of power between the central government and the local government 
bodies.
Activity 
Tabulate the main features of a unitary state and a federal state.
Government
  The government is the agent that implements expectations of the public and  
the will of the state. The government protects the law and peace and it leads the 
people to a common goal.
    
The government is the agent which converts the wish of the state or   
 the  people into policies and implements them. 
     - Professor Garner -
In a democratic country the government is elected to power through an 
election by majority vote. The government can be changed occasionally depending 
on the public opinion expressed at elections.
The government consists of the following institutions.
Legislature 
(promulgation of laws)Executive  
(execution of laws)Judiciary
(dispenses justice)Government
Activity 
Differentiate between the state and the government.
19
For free distributionMain components of the government and their functions
  The government consists of the main institutions such as the legislature, 
executive and the judiciary.
Legislature
    Representatives for the
Fig 1.5 -  Parliament of Sri Lankalegislature are selected for a fixed 
term by universal franchise in an 
election. Tasks of this body are;
 ²Promulgation of laws
 ²Management of finance 
 ²Control of the executive
Executive
The executive is the implementing body of the laws promulgated by the 
legislature. The selection procedure of members depends on the nature of the  
constitution. In a parliamentary government, the executive consists of the Prime 
Minister and the cabinet. The political party which wins the majority of seats in a 
general election gets the opportunity to form the cabinet.
In a presidential government, the president is the head of the executive. the 
president is elected by a presidential election.
Judiciary
The judiciary sorts out the disputes arising out of the implementation of the 
laws enacted by the legislature. The main function of the judiciary is the dispensation 
of justice. The judiciary plays a major role in protecting the rights of citizens and 
safeguarding the constitution.
In federal states, the problems that crop up between the central and regional 
governments are solved by higher seats of the judiciary.
The procedures of appointing judges for higher courts are included in the 
constitution.  
20
For free distributionActivity 
Tabulate the roles of the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. 
Forms of government
In modern states two types of government are to be seen. They are;
 ²Parliamentary government
 ² Presidential government
Parliamentary government
A parliamentary government consists of a parliament with representatives 
elected by the people for a fixed term, a cabinet appointed by the parliament and an 
independent judiciary.
In a parliamentary government the executive is directly appointed by 
parliament from the elected representatives. As such the executive is directly 
responsible and answerable to parliament. Hence the parliamentary system of 
government is described as a government of responsibility. The Prime Minister and 
the cabinet are collectively accountable to the parliament. If it deviated from this 
process the legislature can defeat the government at any moment.
There are two types of parliamentary government: the nominal executive and 
the political executive. In Britain, the nominal executive is the king or the queen. It 
comes down as a tradition.
The political executive in a parliamentary system of government is the Prime 
Minister and the cabinet.
Features of a parliamentary system of government
 ²It consists of two types, i.e. the nominal executive and the real executive. 
(Political executive)
 ²The executive is elected by the legislature. 
 ²A direct relationship exists between the executive and the legislature.
 ² The executive is collectively responsible to the legislature.  
 ²The legislature has the power to remove the executive.
21
For free distributionActivity 
Establish a student parliament in your school and take steps to conduct 
proceedings. Get the assistance and guidance from your subject teacher.
Presidential system of government
In a presidential system of government, the president is elected by a 
presidential election. Thus, the head of the executive is the President.
Special features of the presidential system of government
 ²  The President implements executive power.
 ²The President is the leader of the government and the state.  
 ²The executive is not directly responsible to the legislature.
 ²The legislature does not control the executive directly.
 The presidential government is the government which concentrates 
all the executive powers in the constitution sans the influences of the 
legislature on the president, who is independent and not accountable 
to the legislature for his political policies.
       - Professor Garner -
Activity 
 ²Tabulate the differences between the presidential and the parliamentary 
system of governments.
 ²Explain briefly the procedure for the selection of the president and the 
powers of the president under the 1978 constitution of Sri Lanka.
Responsibilities of the citizen  
 In a democratic society, the citizen can enjoy a series of civil, political, 
economical and cultural rights. While enjoying these rights, he has to fulfil duties 
to society. They are categorized as, 
 ²Legal duties
 ²Moral duties
22
For free distributionPayment of taxes, obedience to the existing law, safeguarding the constitution, 
protecting law and order are examples for legal duties. Failure to fulfil legal duties 
is a punishable offence.
Respecting elders, following social customs and traditions are examples of 
moral duties. The conscience of a person is the judge regarding the accomplishment 
of moral duties.
The individual should enjoy all the rights without harming the social welfare. 
A person has a right to engage in a profession. It is the responsibility of the individual 
to engage in it with dedication towards social development.
Study the articles mentioned below, of the constitution (1978) of Democratic 
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka to learn about the duties of citizens. 
        The exercise and the enjoyment of rights and freedom are inseparable from 
the performance of duties and obligations and accordingly it is the duty of every 
person in Sri Lanka -
(a) To uphold and defend the constitution and the law
(b) To promote national welfare and to foster national unity
 (c) To work conscientiously in his chosen occupation
  (d) To protect public property and to combat misuse and waste
 (e) To respect the rights and freedom of others
 (f) To protect nature and conserve natural resources 
Responsibilities towards the citizen 
 The state  is also  responsible in many ways towards the citizen. Most states 
have included these policies in the constitution itself. Therefore, the  responsibilities 
of the governments towards people while carrying out administrative work are as 
follows;
 ²Protection of law and order
 ²Safeguarding the principles of equality
 ²Conforming to the constitution
 ²Protecting the fairness of the law
 ²Ensuring equal distribution of the national wealth  
 ²Ensuring transparency in financial control
 ²Providing social security and welfare 
 ²Protecting and safeguarding the environment
23
For free distributionActivity 
 ²Mention three rights you enjoy as a student and make a list of 
responsibilities you have to discharge related to the rights. 
 ²Tabulate one's rights as a member of the family and one's duties.
 ² Make a list of duties you have to accomplish for the country as a future  
citizen. 
Factors essential for the success of democratic governance 
 A series of factors are essential for the success of  democratic governance.
Some of them are stated below;
Free and fair elections
 An opportunity was provided to learn the features  of a free and fair election 
under the “ features of democratic governance ”.
 The rulers are selected by the elections based on the universal franchise. 
The voter must be given the opportunity to cast his vote free of influence, according 
to his political opinion. It is a basic feature of a free election.
 A fair election is one in which all the political groups are allowed to engage 
in election activities equally, in a suitable environment free from corruptions and 
malpractices.
 Holding elections alone is not adequate for the existence of democracy; 
they should be free and fair.
 Gaining power in a free and fair election is a requirement to obtain public 
support, confidence and acceptance towards the rulers. This is called the legitimacy 
of a government. 
Existence of the supremacy of the law
The laws are the rules promulgated by the government to control the external 
behaviour of citizens. The obedience submission to the law and respecting those 
by both rulers and subjects should be done, without superseding the laws. The 
existence of the supremacy of the law is helpful for the government to maintain its 
affairs unobstructed and to establish public confidence. 
24
For free distributionIndependence of the Judiciary 
The judiciary is considered the main tower in
Fig 1.6  
building democracy. Maintenance of this institute without 
any influence is essential in democracy. The judiciary 
should exist impartially as an institute free of undue 
influence to dispense justice and fairness according to the 
existing law.
Then only justice could be dispensed to all the 
citizens of the country according to the existing law. Democratic governments set 
up provisions in the constitutions to protect the sovereignty of the judiciary. The 
existence of an independent and impartial judiciary is vital to setup a just and a law 
abiding society. 
Existence of  people with political intelligence
 Bringing a people friendly government into power is of paramount 
importance for  successful democratic governance. The voter is of prime importance 
in this process.
 The political parties and groups present their policies to the people. The 
voters should be politically intelligent to vote correctly taking such policies into 
consideration.
    Moreover, the voter must display concern to elect the candidates of 
exemplary character in society and great leaders devoted to build the nation. The  
intelligent  voter must be concerned to prevent the selection of politicians who are 
guilty of offences in society. Thereby the voter is able to build good governance in 
the country. The existence of intelligent, politically educated public is very essential 
in building a peaceful political environment free of fraud and corruption.
Activity 
 ²Make a list of matters a voter should pay attention to when deciding to cast 
his vote. 
Existence of a sound economic standard
Fulfillment of fundamental rights to the highest standard is a key factor in 
strengthening democracy. The availability of food, clothing, housing, education, 
health and common amenities adequately is useful for the existence of a democratic 
society.
Existence of qualities like freedom, rights and equality depends on the sound 
economic level. To achieve these conditions, social welfare is also undertaken by a 
democratic government.
25
For free distributionAvailability of free and unbiased media
You will be able to learn the role played by the media under ''the features of 
a democratic governance.''  
As the right to access information is an essential factor in a democracy, it 
is the task of the media to ensure it. Therefore, the existence of an environment 
conducive to the provision of information in a free and unbiased manner is essential 
for the success of democracy. Media has an obligation and a responsibility to 
provide unbiased and true information with a sense of responsibility. The media 
can build public opinion correctly by doing so.
Democratic life
 Establishment of democratic principles in society is vital for the success of 
democratic governance. A democrat should have the following qualities.
 ²Taking decision through discussions
 ²Tolerance of opposite views
 ²Respecting majority decision  
 ²Co-operation
 ²Respect for human rights
 ²Obedience to law
 ²Enjoying rights while fulfilling duties
 ²Identifying factors that hinder democracy and present constructive criticism. 
  Accordingly, the members of institutions like the family, school, higher 
educational institutes and places of employment must appreciate democratic 
principles in conducting their affairs.
Importance of  democratic governance
Enjoyment of equal rights
Democracy is based on basic concepts such as personal freedom, rights, and 
equality. In a democracy, all citizens are entitled to equal rights irrespective of 
differences. No one is discriminated. There are provisions to establish a suitable 
26
For free distributionmachinery to build such an environment in a democratic government. The existence 
of a constitution and acting in accordance with it in a democratic country is an 
example of this.
Possession of equal rights, building social integrity, reducing social conflicts 
help personal development. The opportunity to enjoy equal rights contributes to the 
development of the entire society. 
Opportunity to develop personal abilities and skills 
 The citizens of a democratic country have the opportunity to develop  their 
skills to the maximum. An individual has the opportunity to develop his intelligence, 
abilities and various skills. There are no limitations or obstacles imposed in this 
regard.
Not only opportunities provided to acquire education and vocational training 
but special identified skills are also improved.
Enjoyment of freedom and rights based on equality are of great help for the 
development of personal abilities and skills. 
Opportunity for the citizens to take part in the government
 A special feature of democratic governance is the political right of the 
people to take part in governance. Since they cannot take part directly, it is done 
through representatives. Hence, the rulers are elected by voters through universal 
franchise. The citizens have the opportunity to engage in election activities. One 
can present himself as a candidate. Moreover, by being vigilant of the activities of 
an elected government, a citizen can present his opinion. 
Priority to human development
Food, housing, education, health, employment and other common amenities 
are factors which affect human development. These factors are instrumental in the 
qualitative development of the living conditions of the people.
In a working democracy, various political parties contest to gain power. In 
this contest, priority is mostly given to the party manifesto (policies) that bring 
people's welfare.
It is a special feature in democracy, to pay special attention in providing 
facilities. With the development of democracy the state has become a welfare 
institute in the last decades of the 20th century.
27
For free distributionIn some democratic countries, services such as education and health are 
provided free of charge. Sri Lanka is one such example. 
Foundation for the development of a peaceful society
  Most countries at present are multi- racial and multicultural societies. Every 
citizen is a partner of the administration in a democratic country. The following 
aspects have contributed to build a peaceful society
 ²Existence of the supremacy of law
 ²Independence of the judiciary
 ²Freedom, equality and possession of equal rights
 ²Respect for majority decisions
 ²Regard for minority opinion
 ²Come to decision through discussions
 ²Opportunity for peaceful expression of ideas of the citizen
Social welfare
 The transition of the state into a welfare organization occurred with the 
advent of democracy in the early decades of the 20th century. As a result,  special 
attention was paid to social activities which contributed to the quality of the standard 
of living of the citizens in a democratic government.
 The government's role in the administration of the programmes on education, 
health, housing, transport, social security, poverty alleviation and caring for the 
aged are examples for this.
Fig 1.7 - Education

28
For free distribution  Examples of opportunities Rights
e.g; Equality before law
^1& -----------------------------------
^2& -----------------------------------1. Possession of equal rights
^1& -----------------------------------
^2& -----------------------------------2. Development of personal  
    capabilities and skills   
    development
^1& -----------------------------------
^2& -----------------------------------3. Participation in governance
   As a student and a member of the family, write down in columns ΙΙ and  
   ΙΙΙ respectively the opportunities you get to develop the qualities in column 1. 
Column 1
QualityColumn 2
(As a school 
student)Column 3
(As a member of the 
family)
1. Cooperation.
2. Respect others ’ opinion
3. Respect laws
4. Taking decisions through  
    discussionGive instances as examples for citizens of Sri Lanka to acquire the following 
rights.Activity 
 
PB 29For free distribution For free distribution
Decentralisation and Devolution 
of Power 02
Introduction
 The ability a state possesses to implement the administrative affairs of that 
state is, described in simple terms as power. While the final authority of power 
is the public and that power possessed by the public is described as sovereign  
power. The three areas: administrative power, voting power and basic rights, are 
included in this. There are several aspects of power. Political, administrative, 
social and economic are some of them. One way of defining the concept of 
power from the point of view of political science is the administration of power 
according to their wishes in order to control those subject to their power and 
should those being controlled fail to accept, ensure acceptance through the use 
of force. 
 This power which the state has, can be decentralized, or devolved. 
Accordingly, the present day states decentralize as well as devolve power. The 
power of a state is subject to decentralization as well as devolution based on 
the need of that state. If some state, for convenience of administration devolves 
only the administrative power upon regional administrative units, this is called 
decentralization of power. Similarly if some part of the threefold power involving 
legislative, executive and judiciary of the central government is devolved upon 
regional units of administration through the constitution, this is described as 
devolution of power. 
 By studying this lesson unit, you will be able to understand the concept 
of power, its different facets, decentralization and devolution of power, unitary 
and federal systems of government, and with our past experiences, we can 
understand how power is devolved in countries like the United States of America 
and Switzerland. 
30 31For free distribution For free distribution
Power
  The ability a state possesses to implement the administrative affairs of that 
state is, defined as power. While the final holder of power is people, that power 
owned by them is described as sovereign power. Administrative power, franchise 
and fundamental rights are included in this.
The manner in which sovereign power is implemented in Article 4 of the 
1978 constitution is as follows, 
The sovereignty of the people shall be exercised and engaged in the following 
manner.
(a)  The legislative power of the people shall be exercised by the parliament, 
consisting of elected representatives of the people and by the people at 
a referendum.
(b)  The executive power of the people, including the defence of Sri Lanka 
shall be exercised by the President of the Republic, elected by the 
people;
(c)  The judicial power of the people shall be exercised by parliament 
through courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or  
recognized, by the constitution, or created and established by law, 
except with regard to matters related to the privileges, immunities and 
powers of parliament and of its members where as the judicial power 
of the people may be exercised by parliament according to law.
Types of the Power
 The concept of power takes various forms. Political power, administrative 
power, social power, economic power etc., are some examples for it.
 In accordance with the view point of political science, power has been 
described as “the ability to govern the subordinates as per the consent of the 
governors and the ability to obtain immunity by force when it is contrary to the 
consent.”  
 From the view point of economics, “the attempt taken to control others in 
an economy by a group of authorized persons” has been defined as power with the 
view point of economic science.
 It has been described sociologically as “the ability to exceed persons of the 
society and existing social organizations ” as power.
30 31For free distribution For free distribution
Decentralization of Power
 Decentralization of power means the assignment of some of the powers 
vested in the Central Government, upon regional units of administration or 
otherwise, the devolution of the powers of the Central Government upon regional 
units in order to facilitate administrative functions and also to involve regional 
individuals in administrative activities. 
 One outstanding feature evident in the decentralization of power is that it is 
implemented through an Act passed by the legislature. Similarly, another feature is 
that such power can be re-vested in the central government at any moment. The best 
example, that can be given is the decentralization of power on  Local Government 
Bodies in Sri Lanka.
 Through the decentralization of power the responsibility of formulating 
plans, management, acquisition of resources and their distribution have been 
assigned to regional level administrative bodies, local government bodies, provincial 
governments, semi - independent public authorities and corporations. 
 Decentralization of powers of the central government can be implemented 
in various ways. Decentralizing the pattern of administration is one of them. It 
will be possible to understand how the administrative power from national level to 
regional level, is decentralized, from the examples below.
National level
District level
Regional level
Grama Niladhari division levelMinistry Secretary
District Secretary
Divisional Secretary
Grama Niladhari
Assignment of   the functions of  central  government to regional administrative 
units, is one aspect of decentralization of power. Under this, formation of the local 
authorities (Local Government Bodies): Municipal Councils, Urban Councils, 
Pradeshiya Sabha are examples.
 Another aspect of decentralization of power is the assignment to regional 
units the powers that belong to state enterprises or state authorities. In this regard, 
necessary powers are vested in different departments, corporations and authorities 
to run state enterprises. e.g. State Petroleum Corporation, Sri Lanka Ports Authority. 
32 33For free distribution For free distribution
Unitary State 
 What happens in the decentralization of power is the assignment of only 
administrative powers of the state to regional administrative units. In other words, 
legislative, executive and judicial powers are handled by a single center of power. 
A unitary state is a state where the legislative, executive and judicial powers 
are executed and controlled by a single central government. No devolution of 
power takes place in a Unitary State. Local government bodies can exist as some 
administrative powers of the central government have been decentralized in order 
to facilitate administrative functions. Local government bodies operating in Sri 
Lanka can be cited as an example. While the assignment of administrative powers 
to local government bodies are vested through an Act of Parliament, there is also 
the ability for the Central Government to withdraw such powers from local bodies, 
at any moment. 
 Professor Herman J. Finer, the eminent political scientist, points out that,    
“If all types of executive powers are concentrated on a single institution, this 
becomes a Unitary State. ”
Characteristics of a Unitary State
 ²Exercising the Executive, Legislative and Judicial power  by a single central 
government.
 ² Decentralization of only the above administrative powers to regional 
administrative units with the objective of facilitating the administrative 
functions of the central government.
 ² Decentralization of administrative power is only possible through an Act 
passed by the legislature of the Central Government.
 ²The ability to revert the administrative power that have been decentralized, at 
any instance the Central Government desires.
Devolution of Powers
 The assignment of the executive, legislative and judicial power vested in the 
Central Government to local Government Bodies by an Act of Parliament is termed 
as devolution  of power.  This can be implemented only through the  constitution.
 If power is devolved newly or the vested power is revised by any means, the 
existing constitution should be amended.
32 33For free distribution For free distribution
Reasons for the devolution of power in Modern States
 ² Need for unity to be built up amidst diversity. 
What this implies is to gather all the groups who speak different languages, 
follow different religions and belong to different ethnic groups under a 
common principle of nationhood to participate in the functions of government 
while respecting the identity of the respective groups.
 ² The difficulty of administration from a single central position because of the 
size of the state.
 ²Ensure national security.
Federal States
 You have learnt that the assignment of  the Legislative, Executive and 
Judicial power of the Central Government to regional units of administration is 
devolution of power. States that have implemented such devolution of power are 
called Federal States or in other words the states where Legislative, Executive 
and Judicial power of the Central Government is assigned to regional  units of 
administration by the constitution itself are Federal States. Division of power  
between the Central  Government and State Governments is a basic feature of the 
Federal System of government. Instead of a single center for power, two types of 
centers as central and state, can be seen in Federal States. Similarly, sometimes, the 
existence of two systems of law, such as laws of the Central Government and the 
laws of the State Government can be seen in a Federal State.
 Federal States are formed due to various reasons and factors. One such 
factor is the union of several independent states and the creation of a Federal State 
to facilitate administrative functions.
 Normally, Local Governments or Federal States are called states.  Sometimes 
some other specific terms are in use to designate a federation.
eg - The Local Governments functioning in Switzerland are called Cantons.
34 35For free distribution For free distribution
Characteristics of a Federal State
 ²There is a written constitution.
 ²Demarcation of powers of federal states as well as Central Government clearly 
in the constitution.
 ²Assignment of power of interpretation to the constitution to a higher judiciary 
e.g. Federal jurisdiction of the United States of America.
 ²Establishment of an upper house of representatives (Senate) e.g. : Senate of 
the United States of America.
Characteristics of a federal state for its effective existence
 ²Affecting as per the existing constitution of the state.
 ² All ethnic groups to exist with common feeling.
 ² Providing financial resources to federal states in a fair manner.
New tendencies of federal states
 Federal states as well as the Central Government are treated equally in a 
federal system. Nevertheless the general tendency for the central government to 
become powerful could be seen when in operation. The central government has 
the ability to lead federal states. Some factors which have affected to create such a 
situation are as follows;  
 ²Although the consent of federal states is obtained to amend the constitution of 
the government,  neglecting the consent of federal states in making ordinary 
laws. 
 ² In instances of interpretation of the constitution, it is done to the advantage of 
the Central Government.  
 ²The Central Government has become the strongest in the implementation of 
financial deals between the Central Government and federal states. Federal 
states depend on the financial allocations made by the Central Government. 
These are provided subject to various conditions. 
 ²As the welfare provided by the government increases, its responsibility is 
assigned to the Central Government. 
 ² Co-ordination is accelerated as a result of modern developments in 
communication and transport services. 
34 35For free distribution For free distribution
 ² Assigning the responsibility of taking economic decisions which affect the 
whole country in face of world economic crises, to the Central Government. 
 ²S i t u a t i o n  i n  t h e  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  fi e l d  a f t e r  t h e  S e c o n d  W o r l d  W a r .                                                     
e.g. Enhancement of power of  the President of the United States of America.
 For you to understand the difference between the two concepts of 
decentralization and devolution, study the diagram below; 
 
 Decentralization of power  
Administrative 
powers of 
the Central 
Government  
Regional Units of Administration
e.g :- Local Government Bodies
Regional Units of 
Administration 
e.g:- Local 
Government Bodies
Regional Units of 
Administration 
e.g:- Local 
Government 
Bodies
Regional Units of Administration
e.g :- Local Government Bodies
36 37For free distribution For free distribution
Devolution of Power
Regional Units of Administration 
e.g:- Local Government Bodies
Regional units of 
Administration 
e.g:- Local  Government 
Bodies
Legislative Executive and 
judicial powers of the 
Central Government
Federations
Federations
Federations
Regional 
Administration 
units
e.g:- Local  
Government Bodies
Federations
Regional 
Administration 
units
e.g:- Local  
Government Bodies
According to the above diagram what has taken place in decentralization is, 
vesting only administrative powers of the Central Government to administrative 
units. It should be understood that the said Regional administrative units are not 
called prefectures or independent states. The Provincial Council system which is in 
operation now in our country is a fine example.
      Decentralization means a split of the task of  the Central Government, and federal 
states or independent administrative units will evolve thereby. Decentralization 
taken place where it is necessary to facilitate independent administrative units. 
Decentralization as well as devolution of power has been done in some federal 
states. 
 ²Create simple definitions of ‘decentralization ’ and  ‘devolution ’ based on 
the facts you have learnt.Activity
 
36 37For free distribution For free distribution
 Unitary Government
You have already studied what the concept of decentralisation of power 
means. We have identified the states which have decentralised power as unitary 
states. The governments which are in power in the unitary states are identified as 
unitary governments. Given below is a definitions of a unitary state. 
"If the authorized power has been agglomerated in one central 
authorized institute however it is called a Unitary State"
       - Professor Hermon J. Fainer -
The following governments are examples of unitary governments. 
 ²Sri Lanka 
 ²Great Britain
 ²France
Characteristics of a Unitary Government
 You have learnt what a Unitary Government is. Two ideological views 
are expressed by two political scientists on several characteristics of  a Unitary 
Government, appears below; 
  
Supremacy of the Central Government and absence of extra sovereign 
bodies in the Government is the main feature of a Unitary Government.
             -Prof. C.F. Strong - 
“One central authority vested with the power to enforce law is the basic 
feature of a Unitary Government. ”
       - Prof. A.V . Dicey - 
 
 
38 39For free distribution For free distribution
Accordingly, features of a Unitary Government are stated as follows;
 ² Parliament, the legislature of the Central Government, is the highest law 
making authority.
 ²Decentralization of power to Local Government bodies to facilitate 
administrative functions. (e.g: Pradeshiya Sabha, Urban councils and 
Municipal Councils functioning at present in Sri Lanka)
 ²Concentration of Sovereign power of the state in one center (Central 
Government) 
 ²Centralization of Legislative, Executive and Judicial power in the Central 
Government.
Advantages of a Unitary System of Government
 ²The ability of taking quick decisions easily by the government 
 ²Inconsistencies between bodies which exercise power such as Central 
Government and State Governments are less due to the non-existence of such 
bodies.
 ²Government and the Judiciary are common to the whole state.  
                  
Federal Government
 The governments which exist in federal states are called Federal 
Governments. The outstanding feature of a Federal Government is the division of 
power of government between the Central Government and the Local bodies. 
 Two definitions of eminent political scientists are given below.
"It is a government which paves the way for unity through 
diversity". 
       - A.V Dicey -
''Though it has independence to act within the power range, at 
times, the way is open for acting together on some aspects'' 
          
 - Professor K.C. Wiere -
Examples of countries where Federal Governments exist :-
 The United States of America, Switzerland, Australia
38 39For free distribution For free distribution
Salient features of a Federal Government 
 ² Building a common nationality respecting ethnic diversity in a multi ethnic 
community. 
 ²Facilitates administration in countries with a large land mass 
 ²Facilitates prevention of a state becoming dictatorial as a result of the force and 
influence brought upon the Central Government by the regional government. 
 ²Strengthening of the framework of democracy.
Unwholesome features of a Federal Government
 ²The dissatisfaction among the State Governments about the powers awarded 
under decentralisation. 
 ²The tendency of states attempting to separate themselves from the Central 
Government.
 ² The collapse of administration as a result of inconsistencies in decision 
making between the Central Government and the State Government.
 ²Delay in the constitution - mating process due to the existence of a second 
legislature.
 ²Scarcity of efficient officers resulting in failures in the administration of states.
 ² Prepare a list of differences between the unitary government and the 
federal government.  Activity
History of decentralization and devolution of power in 
Sri Lanka 
History of decentralization of power in Sri Lanka
 The concept of decentralization of power is not novel to Sri Lanka. When 
observing the systems of government that prevailed in the distant past of our country 
it is obvious that decentralization of power had taken place in different forms to 
facilitate the functioning of the government.
40 41For free distribution For free distribution
Examples 
 ²Appointment of officials named “Gambara”, “Gamani” by King 
Pandukabaya during the Anuradhapura era to govern villages. 
 ²Appointment of local government officials with administrative powers by 
King Parakramabahu during the Polonnaruwa era.
 ²Appointment of local government officials to maintain the governance 
unchanged with the migration of westerners.
e.g: Appointment of a “Resident officer” at provincial level by the British in              
      1815 A.D. 
The manner in which power was decentralized in Sri Lanka during 
the British colonial era
The manner in which decentralization of power took place during the British 
rule can be identified by the Municipal Councils Act 1865 A.D. In 1865 AD and in 
1866 AD Municipal Councils were established based on Colombo and Kandy cities  
respectively. British governance has immensely influenced the present situation in 
Sri Lanka where decentralization of power has been established.
 Village Councils (Gam Sabha) were established in 1871 AD. An ordinance 
enacted in the same year assigned the Village Councils provisions to solve minor 
disputes arising in villages, to solve the problems related to agriculture and 
irrigation and provide health protection. An executive committee appointed for 
local governance under the Donoughmore Constitutional reforms in 1931 extended 
the powers of Village Councils (Gam Sabha). In addition, the establishment of 
Urban Councils in 1940, and the Local Government Ordinance passed in 1943 
further decentralized power in the British colonial era.
Attempts to decentralize power after independence
  The existence of local government bodies could be noticed even after gaining 
independence in 1948. The political authority system was established in 1973 to 
decentralize power. This attempt of the United Front government was to provide 
leadership for the enforcement of administration at district level. Subsequently, 
District Minister system in 1980 established the District Development Council 
abolishing the Village Councils and Town councils. Later, in 1981, Divisional 
Councils (Pradeshiya Mandala) and Village Councils (Gramodaya Mandala) started 
functioning and Pradeshiya Sabhas were created according to the Pradeshiya Sabha  
Act, No 15 of 1987.
40 41For free distribution For free distribution
Attempts to devolve power in Sri Lanka
 Opinions on devolution of power had been presented in our country 
nearly a century ago. The proposal to establish a federal state in the upcountry 
regions forwarded by Mr. S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike in 1926 is prominent as an 
effort to devolve power. The Bandaranaike-Chelvanayakam Pact signed between 
Mr. S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike and Mr. S.J.V . Chelvanayakam in 1957 and Dudley-
Chelvanayakam Pact in 1965 are examples of attempts to devolve power after 
independence. But the enforcement of these pacts was not possible in the desired 
manner. 
 In the recent past, in 1970’s and 1980’s, a tendency towards the process 
of power devolution is noticed. However, the then governments did not intervene 
directly and they were more inclined towards decentralization of power than 
devolution of power.
Establishment of Provincial Councils in Sri Lanka
Provincial Councils were established by the 13th amendment to the 
constitution of 1978 and the Act of Parliament No 42 of 1987 based on the 09 
provinces prevailed. Chapter XVII A and Article 154A (1) of the 1978 constitution 
states thus
“Subject to the provisions of the constitution, a Provincial Council shall be  
established for every province specified in the eighth schedule with effect 
from such date or dates as the president may appoint by order published in the 
gazette. Different dates may be observed in respect of different provinces”
The 9 provinces which were established under the 13th Amendment to the 
constitution are as follows.
 The nine provinces established according to 8th schedule of the constitution 
are given below
1. Western    6.  North western
2. Central    7.  North central
3. Southern    8.  Uva
4. Northern    9.  Sabaragamuwa
5. Eastern 
42 43For free distribution For free distribution
N
The nine provinces of Sri Lanka Northern 
Province
North Central 
Province 
Sabaragamuwa
Province Central 
Province  Eastern 
Province 
Uva
Province 
Southern
Province Western
Province North Western 
Province 
Organizational structure of a Provincial Council
 A Provincial Council is organized into institutions such as Governor, the 
Chief Minister, the Board of Ministers and the members of the Provincial Council. 
The organizational structure can be illustrated by the diagram as shown below;
42 43For free distribution For free distribution
The Governor
The Chief Minister
The Board of Ministers
The Provincial Council
Opposition
 Government
 Thereby, an attempt is made to provide a brief knowledge about the 
institutions: the Governor, the Chief Minister, the Board of Ministers and the 
Provincial Council.
Governor of the Province
 A Governor shall be there in each province and he is the delegate                                                
co-ordinator of the Central Government and the Provincial Council. The appointment 
of the Governor is done by the President and his tenure is 5 years. The Governor 
can resign before the end of his term. A Governor can be removed by addressing a 
proposal passed by a two- thirds majority of the Provincial Council to the President. 
Article 154 B (1) and (2) of the constitution (1978) states about the Governor, thus; 
The Governor shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his 
hand, and shall hold office, in accordance with Article 4 (b), during the 
pleasure of the President.
‘There shall be a Governor for each province for which a Provincial 
Council has been established in accordance with Article 154A’
Powers and functions of Governor
 ²Summons the Provincial Council, prorogue and dissolves 
 ² Addresses the Council and issues messages
 ²Appoints the Chief Minister, Board of Ministers, and other executive 
officials in the province
 ²Assents the statutes passed by the Provincial Council
44 45For free distribution For free distribution
 ²Performing according to the President's advice in emergencies 
e.g.  Failure of administrative machinery in the Provincial Council
 Financial instability
 ²Coordinating between the Central Government and the Provincial Council
 ²Exercising Govener's functions on the advice of the Chief Minister as the 
nominal executive
Chief Minister and the board of ministers 
 It is mentioned in the 1978 Constitution that Provincial Councils should 
consist of a Chief Minister and a Board of Ministers selected from the members of 
the Provincial Council. The main function of this Board of Ministers is to assist the 
Governor in his functions and advise him. The Appointment of  the Chief Minister is 
one of  the functions of the Governor and the person to be appointed should possess 
the consent of the majority of members in the Provincial Council. The Governor 
should appoint the rest of the ministers on the advice of the Chief Minister. The Chief 
Minister and the Board of Ministers are collectively responsible and answerable to 
the Provincial Council.
Powers and functions of the Chief Minister and the Board of 
Ministers
 ²Render advice to the governor in the exercise of his functions
 ²Preparation of the provincial budget
 ²Drafting and executing economic development and administrative plans of 
the Province
The Provincial Council
 You are already aware that Provincial Councils were established in the 09 
provinces of Sri Lanka. (Article) 154 (2) of the constitution states that Provincial 
Councils will be constituted in each Provincial Council separately .
"Every Provincial Council established under paragraph (1) shall 
be constituted upon the election of the members of such council in 
accordance with the law relating to Provincial Council elections''.
 Article 154D (1) of the constitution states the content of the provincial 
legislature. Accordingly, taking the land area and the population of each province, 
the number of members is determined by the law.
44 45For free distribution For free distribution
The term of office of a Provincial Council lasts for five years. If it is not 
dissolved before the expiration of the said period, with the completion of five years, 
it is considered as dissolved. Members of the Provincial Council are elected only 
through Provincial Council elections.
The main function of the Provincial Council is to formulate and pass statutes 
on matters determined under the list of powers of Provincial Councils stated in 
the 9th schedule of the constitution. Similarly, passing the budget of the Provincial 
Council, making decisions relevant to the development of infrastructural facilities 
are implemented. The election of the Chief Minister and the Board of Ministers not 
more than four, from among the Provincial Council members is also executed by 
the legislature of each Provincial Council.
Powers and functions of Provincial Councils
Powers have been classified into three lists according to the 13th amendment to the 
1978 Constitution.
 v 1st List (Provincial Council list) 
 v 2nd List (Reserved list) 
 v 3rd  List  (Concurrent list)
 Accordingly, functions and powers have been classified under three main 
fields: central government, provincial council and concurrent powers which both 
institutions can exercise. Next you can learn about the three lists and the powers 
assigned to each of them as laid down.
List I (Provincial Council List/ Powers of Provincial Councils) 
 The Provincial Council list contains the functions and powers of Provincial 
Councils. Functions and powers of 37 subjects that Provincial Councils are vested 
with, are denoted in this list.
e.g:-
 ²Planning – implementation of provincial economic plans
 ²Affairs related to local government 
 ²Provincial housing and construction: implementing housing development 
programmes and projects
 ²Social services and rehabilitation 
 ²Agricultural extension. Rehabilitation and maintenance of minor irrigation 
work 
46 47For free distribution For free distribution
 Provincial Councils can pass statutes on these subjects, but significantly, a 
Council cannot exercise any power in respect of any subject in the reserved list and 
it cannot pass any statute in this regard. It has no power to initiate an act.
List II (Reserved list/Powers of Central Government) 
 Powers relevant to 17 subjects exercised by the central government are 
denoted in List II or Reserved list. Subjects which are of great significance are 
included in this Reserved list and the Parliament is vested with the sole power to 
formulate law relevant to these subjects. Accordingly, several powers included in 
List II are given below. 
 ²Forming National policies on all subjects and functions
The power to make policies regarding defence and national security, 
internal security, law and order.
 ²Foreign affairs 
 All matters related to the government of Sri Lanka with any foreign 
country; Diplomatic affairs; United Nations  Organization; participation 
in international conferences, implementation of decisions taken  there; 
entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and 
implementing treaties, war and peace; and foreign jurisdiction are covered 
under this.
 ²Finance in relation to national revenue, monetary policy and external resources
 ²Justice in so far it relates to the judiciary and the structure of courts
 ²Immigration, Emigration and Citizenship 
 ²Census and Statistics
List III (Concurrent List)
 Powers that can be equally exercised by both Central Government and 
Provincial Councils are classified under List III. It consists of 36 subjects. Some of 
them are given below:
 ²Planning
 Formulating and appraisal of plan implementation strategies at the provincial 
level; progress control; Monitoring the progress of public and state sector 
investment programmes
46 47For free distribution For free distribution
 ²National housing and construction
 The promotion of integrated planning and implementation of economic, 
social and physical development of urban development areas
 ²Social services and rehabilitation 
 Relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of displaced persons, relief for 
distress due to floods, droughts, epidemics or other exceptional causes 
and rehabilitation and resettlement of those affected
 ²Agriculture and Agrarian Services  
 Establishment and promotion of agro - linked industries, establishment and 
maintenance of farms and supervision of private nurseries; soil conservation 
Local Government Bodies / Local Authorities 
Local Authorities in Sri Lanka have been established with the objective 
of facilitating the administration of the Central Government and with the aim of 
providing an efficient service to the public. The possibility of fulfiling public needs 
through the participation of the public as well as the public representatives based on 
a certain land area taken place through Local Authorities. You have already studied 
about these Local Authorities and their functions in grade 09. Hence, you have the 
opportunity to study only their functions here. Local Authorities function in our 
country at present and the main posts of them are denoted below.
Municipal Council             Mayor/ Deputy Mayor 
Urban Council          Chairman / Deputy Chairman
Pradeshiya Sabha  Chairman / Deputy Chairman
48 49For free distribution For free distribution
Powers and functions of Mayor/Chairman
 ²Acts as the executive officer of Municipal Council, Urban Council, Pradeshiya 
Sabha/Sabhai
 ²Summons, presides and postpones the council
 ²Formulates the budget and plans as well as obtains approval from the council
 ²Formulates and implements development plans relevant to their territorial 
limits
 ²Co - ordinates with Central Government and the Provincial Council
 ²Provides public utility services
Powers and functions of Deputy Mayor/Deputy Chairman
 ²Renders necessary assistance to the Mayor of the Municipal Council/ 
Chairman of the Urban Council and the Pradeshiya sabha/Sabhai
 ²Proceeding with the functions of the council in the absence of the Mayor/ 
Chairman
General Assembly
This can be regarded as the policy making body of the Local Authority. It 
consists of representatives elected by public in respect of areas of the local authority. 
The Mayor, Chairman, Deputy Mayor and Deputy Chairman are elected through 
this General Assembly. Formulating of policies and plans, passing the council ’s 
budget, assisting the Mayor/Chairman in the execution of  administrative functions 
receive priority among the powers and functions of the General Assembly.
Structural differences in selected countries
Reason behind the formation of the United States of America as a 
federal government
The United States of America formed with 13 states initially, is a federal 
government with 50 states at present. The original 13 states were located around the 
Eastern coast of the United States of America.
48 49For free distribution For free distribution
These 13 states were independent administrative units prior to the formation 
of the federal government. But, later they were united as the United States with 
the objective of ensuring national security and achieving economic development. 
It resulted in the formation of a government named the United States of America 
which consisted of 13 states. There was also the need to build a strong nation to 
avoid the reoccurrence of the experience they had to face during the British colonial 
regime. 
Laws related to devolution of power had been included in the constitution 
when the United States of America was formed in 1787. Accordingly, powers of the 
Central Government were included in the constitution while the State Governments 
were vested with the rest of the powers. The purpose was to strengthen the State 
Governments.
The Structure of the Government of the United States of 
America
 ²The executive President exercises the executive powers.
Fig 2.1 - --USA The map 
of USA with the 13 states ²The legislature consists of two houses: congress 
(house of representatives) and the senate (bicameral 
legislature) 
 ²The president has to obtain the approval of the senate 
to exercise certain powers.
 Example - Declaration of war, appointment of 
higher officers (ambassadors, judges of the higher 
courts and signing international treaties)
 ²The Supreme Court is empowered to settle the disputes 
between the Central Government and the states over 
the execution of power.
 ²Appointment of two representatives to the senate to represent the interests of 
each state. 
 ²Existence of a federal  judiciary. 
 ²If the acts approved by the congress are inconsistent with the constitution, the 
Supreme Court has the power to reject them.  
 ²Requirements of 2/3 of the consent of the Central Government and 3/4 of the 
states for constitutional amendment.
50 51For free distribution For free distribution
Washington
N.JerseyNew York
MinnesotaMontana
PennsVer.
N.Dakota
Dela wareMaine
S.Dakota
Mar ylandN.HMinnesota
VerginiaMassWisconsin
ConnRose Island  
Ohio
Indiana
Kentucky
N.Carolina
S.CarolinaW.Virginia
GeorgiaIllinois
Ten nesseeIowa
Alabama
MississipiArkansasMissouri
FloridaKansasNebraska
LouisianaTexasOkka homaUtahIdaho
New uexicoOregon
ColoradoNevada
AlaskaWyoming
California
HawaiiArizona
Fig 2.2 - The United States of America with 50    
States at Present
Devolution of power according to the federal constitution 
of the United States of America
 The constitution has vested all the powers except the powers given to the 
Central Government in the states. It is understood that the makers of the constitution 
have made an effort to build a system of federal states with more powers than the  
Central Government. The powers of the Central Government and the states are 
given below. 
Powers of the states Powers of the Central  Government
 ²Education 
 ²Health 
 ²Housing and construction
 ²Local governance and 
highways ²Imposition of taxes and collection
 ²Financial affairs 
 ²National Security  
 ²Foreign affairs and foreign trade
 ²Development of national economy   
   
   
 At present, there is a trend of the government succeeding in strength over 
the states in the U.S.A. There are many underlying reasons and some of them are 
mentioned below.
 ²The complexity of social, political and economic problems.
 ²The struggle for power in the international arena after the Second World War.
 ²The financial strengthening of the Central Government.
50 51For free distribution For free distribution
Establishment of the Swiss Confederation
Reasons behind the establishment of a federal state
 ² The threat to the national security being sandwiched between four countries: 
France, Italy, Germany and Austria. 
 ²The difficulty to develop Switzerland economically due to its harsh 
geographical differences. 
 ²Need to achieve successful solutions to ethnic, language and religious 
diversity.
Fig 2.3 -Political Map of Switzerland
The formation of the federal 
state of Switzerland took place as a 
result of the above reasons. Before 
the formation of a federal state, there 
was a number of small  independent 
states in the country. As a result of the 
civil war between the Catholics and 
the Protestants in mid 19th century the 
federal state was formed and the war 
was called off. 
Fig 2.4 - A landscape of Switzerland
Switzerland stretches to an area 
of 41300 square kilometers (km2) 
and it comprises of communities 
speaking languages such as German, 
French, Italian and Romansh and 
these languages are considered as the 
official languages. 
The constitution of Switzerland 
was approved 150 years back. It has 
been amended occasionally and the new constitution was approved in 1999 for 
the last time. There are 26 provincial governments known as cantons in the federal 
system. It is a significant feature that  freedom of a higher level has been awarded 
to them
52 PBFor free distribution For free distribution
Structure of the federal system in Switzerland
 ²The legislature is called the Federal Assembly and it consists of the national 
council and the council of states.
 ²A coordinated executive council of seven members is in operation and they 
are appointed by the federal assembly.
 ²The coordinated executive is called the federal board and the president leads 
but he has no supremacy over the others.
Powers of the central government
 ²Foreign affairs
 ²Declaration of war and peace
 ²Agreements with foreign countries
 ²Defence and military affairs
 ²Communication, post and telecommunications
Powers of the cantons
 ²Education and higher education
 ²Control of newspapers
 ²Highways
 ²Industries
 ²Immigration
 ²Prevention of infectious diseases
 ²Banking
Special features of the federal system in Switzerland
 ²The powers of the Central Government and the cantons are defined and the 
rest is vested with the Central Government.
 ²If a problem occurred in the execution of power, the federal assembly has the 
power to settle it.
 ²Cantons cannot execute their power and work independently.   
 ²The use of direct democratic strategies to inquire public opinion in decision- 
making by the cantons.
53
53
For free distributionThe Multicultural Society 03
Introduction
 The present day society is extremely complex. Economic, social, 
political and cultural factors have contributed to this complexity. Apart from 
these, geographical factors, migrations and invasions have also influenced 
this tendency. Hence, modern society is comprised of differences like diverse 
ethnic groups, languages, religions, beliefs, customs and manners. Social 
systems with such diversity are termed plural societies by sociologists. 
The different ethnic groups living in such plural societies practise customs, 
manners, languages, religions, beliefs, aspirations, traditions etc., unique 
to them in order to safeguard their identity. Owing to this, the culture of 
even a single country can be diverse. Societies that comprise such cultures 
are called "Multicultural Societies". This unit anticipates provision of a 
correct understanding regarding multicultural societies and the creation of a 
generation of citizens endowed with the competencies necessary to contribute 
to the building of the atmosphere essential for peaceful co-existence in such a 
society.
The Multicultural Society  
 Various sociologists and philosophers have put forward definitions to 
explain what "Culture" means. Given below are a few of them;
Culture is the knowledge, beliefs, arts, habits, values and the behaviours, 
pro-activities and abilities acquired by man as an individual living in 
society.       
        T.B. Tyler 
Culture is the collective name that can be given to all behaviour patterns 
required socially, by means of symbols or inheritance.
       Charles A. Elwood
54
For free distribution
Culture means the socially as well as traditionally accepted forms of 
implementation of beliefs, styles of thought, applied arts, life styles, 
customs and manners.      
 E.T. Healar
From the above definitions, it is evident that all our activities and thoughts 
and desires belong to the category of culture. All of us have got habituated to an 
accepted life style within society. This habituation or moulding is also culture. As 
an individual, each of us from birth to death behave according to the culture we 
have inherited. All the features that manipulate the forces evident in society belong 
to culture. Some of them are given below;
 ²Religion
 ² Language
 ² Knowledge 
 ²Clothes 
 ²Food and Drink 
 ²Arts
 ²Rules and 
regulations ²Faiths
 ²Customs 
 ²Ethics
 ²Values 
 ²Family background 
 ²Economic background 
 ²Beliefs
 ²Equipment used ²Friends associated with 
 ²Education
 ²Politics
 ²Technology
 ²Habitat
 ²Infrastructure    
   
   
            
     In every society an important function or role is performed by culture for the 
existence of that society. Culture continues to change and develops within society, 
with the time.
      Culture varies in terms of society in which the individual lives. As a result, in 
different societies, a culture that is unique to that society develops.
Activity 
 ²Observe well the process from the beginning to the end at a particular 
festive occasion you participated in. Note, step by step the cultural features 
evoked in it.
 ²e.g - The occasion of a wedding or a funeral.
55
55
For free distribution
Basic features of a multicultural society
1. Coexistence of different ethnic groups, different religious beliefs, individuals 
speaking different languages.
2. The existence of a system and manners, ethics and values unique to each 
cultu re on account of the diversity above.
3' Visibility of regional diversity even in each social group.
4' The attempt made by groups of people belonging to each culture to congregate 
forming multi-cultural societies.
5' Due to globalization, advancement of communication technology and tourism 
the world has become a global village accelerating the cultural integrity.
Sri LankaEthnic groupsSinhala
Sri Lankan Tamil
Indian Tamil
Muslim 
Burgher
  Malays
Others
LanguagesSinhala
Tamil 
English
Malay
RegionalUp Country
Low Country
Raja RataCustomsBuddhist
Hindu
Islam
Christian/ 
CatholicRegionalBuddhist
Christian
Islam
Hindu
OthersCatholic
Activity 
Write examples of different customs and traditions related to different 
religions and ethnic groups.
 ²Buddhist 
 ²Hindu 
 ² Muslim
 ²Christian 
^for this, make use of the material you stu died in Grades 6,7,8 and 9 &
56
For free distributionPeople speaking different languages, practising different religions and 
following different customs co-exist in a multicultural society. Multicultural 
societies can be identified in most countries today. Our country, Sri Lanka, is a 
good example of a multicultural society though not much complex. Countries such 
as, India and the United States of America can be cited as multicultural countries 
with complexity.
 ² Population of Sri Lanka according to ethnicity
Ethnic group Population Percentage
Sinhala
Sri Lankan Tamil
Sri Lankan Moor
Indian Tamil
Burgher
Other15"250"081
2"269"266
1"892"638
839"504
38"293
106"83674'9]
11'2]
9'3]
4'1]
0'2]
0'3]
Table No. 3.1
Source - Population Census 2012
Department of Population and Statistics
Activity 
 ²Examine the multicultural features of a country like India or U.S.A and 
prepare an article to be published on a wall paper.
 ² Population of Sri Lanka according to Religion
Religion Population Percentage
Buddhist
Hindu
Islam
Christian14"272"056
2"561"299
1"967"523
1"552"16170]
12'6
9'7
7'6
Table No. 3.2
Source - Population Census 2012
      Department of Population and Statistics
57
57
For free distributionAlthough the composition of the ethnic groups and religions is as above, ethnic 
groups following different religions can be seen.
e.g (-  Sinhala - Buddhist, Catholic/Christian
       Tamil  - Hindu, Buddhist, Christian/Catholic
Fig 3.1 - Some religious places of Sri Lanka
 Even though people are classified according to ethnicity as Sinhala, Tamil 
and Muslims, Sinhala speaking Tamils or Muslims and Tamil speaking Sinhalese 
living in co - existence in the country is noteworthy.
Factors that influenced Sri Lanka for the existence of a 
multicultural society
Location 
 ²Geographical location       
 ²Centralized location in the Indian Ocean 
 ² Located close to India
 ²  Located as an East - West trade centre
58
For free distributionMigrations
 ² Arrival of Vijaya and his retinue
 ²Arrival of a princess and her retinue for the coronation of Vijaya
 ²Arrival of Panduwasdeva and retinue
 ²Arrival of Bhadda Kachchana and retinue
 ²Arrival of Arahath Mihindu and retinue
 ²Arrival of Therini Sangamitta and retinue
 ² Migration that takes place at present for various reasons like tourism, 
employment, education etc.
Invasion
 ² The Sena - Guttika invasion  
 ² The invasion by Pandu - Parinda and retinue
 ²The Kalinga Magha invasion
 ²Invasion by Western European nations
Arrival of Various nationalities for trade
 ²Arabs
 ²Indians
 ²Chinese
 ²European
Import of labourers
 During the time of British administration in Sri Lanka, due to import of 
labourers from South India for cash crop cultivation the heritage and identity of 
those people has caused cultural diversity.
Emergence of a multicultural society and the necessity of 
good governance
Introduction of good governance
Good Governance can be defined as a concept that emerged consequent  to 
the factors that influenced the collapse of social justice as well as the lethargy in 
the economic development of certain countries where there was no lack of either 
economic or human resources.
59
59
For free distributionGiven below are some of the reasons as to why economic development has 
become lethargic as a result of the failure of the economic and human resources of 
these countries to be properly managed. 
 ²Power becoming unnecessarily centralized
 ²Inefficiency of governance  
 ² Politicization of public services
 ²Bureaucratic control
 ² Absence of public participation in deciding on state policy and its 
implementation
 ² Escalation of bribery and corruption
 ² State administrators becoming irresponsible.
 ²Negligence of national goals by the private sector
 While emphasizing the necessity of alleviating the above weaknesses faced 
by most countries, the concept of good governance is one possible solution put 
forward in that regard. 
 Good Governance is a process of deciding on government policies and 
implementing them. The responsibility of those who govern is to be accountable for 
the well-being of citizens to the maximum, protecting civil rights and social justice 
by being law abiding and having transparency without corruption and malpractices
Basic Qualities of Good Governance
1' State control and administration free of corruption and fraud
2' Confirmation of freedom and equity
3' Respecting the supremacy of law and safeguarding the independence of the 
judiciary
4' Individuals responsible for the implementation of state control being 
accountable to the public
5' Safeguarding and confirming rights  
6' Safeguarding media freedom
7' Making use of resources efficiently and productively
8' Acting with transparency
9' Preparation of the background for political socialization
10' Safeguarding and securing constitutionality 
60
For free distributionImportance of respecting political, socio-economic and cultural 
identity of each other for good governance
For good governance, respecting political, socio-economic and cultural 
identity of each other is an essential requirement. It is essential to confirm the above 
qualities in society for this purpose.
Furthermore, paying attention to the following requirements is important ' 
Political 
 ²Respecting the political identity of each other 
 ²Following any political ideology of one's choice
 ²Respecting political leadership
 ²Acting independently when taking political decisions and conclusions
 ² Ensure that such decisions are not obstructive to others  
 ²Conducting free and fair elections
Economic
 ²Involving in a legitimate employment or trade of one's choice
 ²  Organization and implementation of trade unions
 ²Taking steps for the minimization of discrepancies in the distribution of 
income
 ²Development of infrastructural facilities
Social and Cultural 
 ²Adherence to a religion of one's choice 
 ²Following customs and manners
 ² Holding various celebrations
 ²Residing in a region of one's choice
 ² Learning and using different languages 
 ²Travelling freely 
 ²Respecting cultures of others
Acting with respect for political, socio-economic and cultural identity with respect 
to the above is essential for the well-being of  a multicultural society.
61
61
For free distributionImplementation of Good Governance in a multicultural society
 ²confirms mutual trust among ethnic groups 
 ²broaden understanding between each other 
 ²develops participation of all ethnic groups for administrative purposes
 ²learns to respect each other
 ²acts irrespective of religious and cultural diversity
 ²learns to live as law-abiding citizens
 ²acts promoting transparency
Multicultural Society and the Morden States
The modern idea of a national government is one Government for a single 
nation. This implies that a state is one nation. Even though people who belong to 
different cultures live in a country, they are considered as a single nation.
For example,  although Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims and other races as well as 
people of different cultures live in Sri Lanka, they have to be treated as Sri Lankans.
Modern states where democratic governance is implemented endeavour 
to integrate diversities and march towards development independently while 
respecting the diverse cultural identities.
Most of the developed countries have immensely made use of multi-
culturalism in their economic, social and political process. Their theme is ''Unity 
in Diversity.'' Countries like Singapore and Switzerland can be cited as examples.
Activity
 ²Write an essay in no less than 250 words on the topic “Let us implement 
multicultural sociality for the well - being of the country ” Display the 
best compositions in the classroom.
62
For free distribution
Characteristics a citizen should inculcate for the well-being 
of a Multicultural Society
 ²Understanding and identifying cultures of one another, acting consciously 
and respecting each other
 ²Avoiding insulting other religions
 ² Respecting other cultures
 ² Acting so as to avoid conflicts
 ²Developing mutuality
 ²Understanding that acting in co-operation facilitates achievement of victory
 ² Learning and using the language of other ethnic groups 
 ²Implementation of multi - religious programs
 ²Respecting and tolerating of other's views
 ²Equality
Importance of living in unity as members of a Multicultural 
Society
When the people of a multicultural society act cohesively, 
 ²national unity and co-existence develop
 ²conflicts are minimized
 ²mutual goodwill and trust develop
 ²feeling of one nation, one country develops
 ²human freedom and democracy is assured
 ²every citizen is motivated to act with determination, for the development of 
the country as a national duty
 ²other religions or cultures are not disgraced
Achievement of victory is made easy by acting with the objective of                           
co-existence in a multi-cultural society. Every citizen is entitled to peace, security 
and justice without discrimination. If everyone is to live happily we should be 
united in building a strong united country. It is our responsibility that we commit 
ourselves to it. 
Let us consider that it is our duty to ensure that the implementation of the 
great expression in our National Anthem ''As children of a single mother,'' bloom.
63
63
For free distributionActivity
 ²Inquire about the other ethnic groups living along with you in your 
region and what their religions are, 
 ²Discuss with your class teacher and invite a priest or a religious leader 
of another ethnic group for a discussion. 
 ² Why is it important that we learn the main languages used in our 
country? (Tamil language by the Sinhalese and Sinhala language by the 
Tamils) Present 05 points. 
64
for free distributionEconomic Systems and Economic 
Relations 04
Through the study of this chapter you will acquire the ability to 
 ² investigate basic economic problems and economic activities,
 ²explore information about various economic systems,
 ²analyse the present economic systems in relation to development, 
 ²analyse the influence of globalization on Sri Lanka.
4.1. Basic economic problems and economic activities
Man is subject to various needs and wants when living in a social system. 
When attempting to satisfy these wants, man has to face various problems. The 
manner in which each society acts in attempting to resolve these problems is 
different. 
The manner in which societies are organized in order to solve the basic 
economic problems faced by man is termed an economic system.
You may already be aware of various needs and wants arising when living 
as a group in a society. Primary essentials for man’s existence are called needs. 
Clothes, housing, food, etc., are examples of needs. They are explained as basic 
needs. 
The above needs are fulfilled by various persons in different ways. Various 
forms of wants are called needs. Although housing is a basic need, in the fulfilment 
of this need houses are constructed in various forms such as huts, wattle and daub 
houses, large houses, condominiums, etc. From the example above, it is clear that 
they are diverse according to the socio-economic condition of the individual in 
need.
We know that the wants of individuals are different as much as they are 
unlimited. But we are also aware that resources for the satisfaction of these wants are 
limited. Although we need to build a large house,  problems arise when we attempt 
to build it based on requirements such as the land available, finances etc. Therefore, 
if this unlimited necessity is to be met, with the resources available, it becomes 
necessary to function in the context of a systematic and scientific methodology .

65
for free distributionActivity 4.1 
Display on a table human needs and the wants relevant to them.
Basic Economic Problems
 We learned earlier that we have to face various problems in endeavouring 
to satisfy human needs and wants. These problems are common to any economic 
system. Boundless needs and wants of man and limited resources available to satisfy 
them, give rise to these problems. We call this a shortage. Because of shortage, 
selection has to be done when fulfilling wants. Problems that any economic system 
has to face are called basic economic problems. They can be divided to three main 
catego ries.
1. Which, how much of it is to be produced?
 It becomes necessary to decide as to which good is to be produced utilizing 
the resources available. And also, the problem arises as to how much of the selected 
articles are to be produced. The primary reason for this problem is the availability 
of a number of alternative uses of the resources.
 Since it is not possible to satisfy 
Fig 4.1 
all the needs and wants of the individual, 
first of all, he has to decide as to which 
necessities are to be fulfilled first. This 
picture shows several alternative 
decisions that can be taken in this 
regard. It is according to the manner in 
which the economy is organized that a 
decision, as to ‘what’ "how many items 
of each are to be produced," can be 
taken.
2. How is it produced?
After solving the problem as to how many units of the goods are to be 
produced the next economic problem to be faced is regarding how they are to be 
produced. In this regard two sub – problems need to be faced. They are,
i   What is the technique to be applied?
ii By which section is the production to be made?
66
for free distributioni. What is the technique to be applied?
There are two main techniques employed in production. 
 ²Capital Intensive
 Capital Intensive is the utilization of machinery and other capital equipment 
extensively for the production of goods. e.g: If machinery is used for agriculture 
extensively it is called capital intensive agriculture.
 ²Labour Intensive
 Labour intensive is the extensive employment of humans in the production 
of goods. e.g: If a large labour force is used in agriculture it is labour intensive 
agriculture 
ii. Which section does the production? 
 Deciding as to which sector does the production. There are three sectors 
where production takes place. As to how production is carried out is of secondary 
importance.
State and 
private  sectors 
combinedPrivate sector ² Mineral oil production
 ²State sector education
 ²Railway service
 ²Production of garments
 ²Private sector education   
 ²Telephone services carried 
out jointly by the state and 
private sector 
 ²Construction of roadways  State sector
Production 
of goods and 
services
 Various types of business entities such as  sole traders , corporations , 
partnerships, cooperatives have been formed in order to facilitate the production in 
the modern world.
iii. For whom is it produced?
 Deciding  about for whom goods and services are produced is meant by this. 
Society is made up of various groups, in terms of capability to purchase. In this 
instance it is important as to which of these groups is targeted when producing.   
67
for free distribution That is, deciding on the consumers among whom the goods and services are 
to be distributed. Luxury goods which derive a high profit are to be produced for 
people receiving high incomes? Or otherwise, are essential goods to be produced 
for those receiving low incomes? Decision taken in this regard can be noted as 
examples.
Activity 4.1 
 ²Imagine that you own a block of bare land bordering a trunk road. 
Should you intend to use this land for economic activities? Describe 
your decision in the light of the economic question above.   
Production factors and payments for them
         In the satisfaction of human needs, various goods and services are made use 
of. These goods are of two main types,
 ²Economic goods – Goods that bear a cost in production and involve payment 
of a price for use thereof  
  e.g. The features above can be seen in food, clothes, medicine etc. 
 ²Non-economic goods –  Goods that are provided free to us by nature,
   e.g. Sunlight; water, air.
  There are instances where non – economic goods, goods provided free   
  to us, at times become economic goods.
  e.g.
       i.  Although we get water free of charge, we have to pay for bottled water. 
     ii.  We have to pay for sunlight converted to electricity  
    iii. A price has to be paid for nitrogen stored and used in vehicles.
68
for free distribution
1. Land
Fig 4.2 
The earth and all resources related to the 
earth belong to land. The payment made 
for this use in the production process is 
known as rent.
2. Labour
Fig 4.3The physical and mental energy spent by 
various individuals in the production of goods 
and services is called labour. Since labourers, 
farmers, drivers, etc., spend comparatively 
more physical energy, it is called physical 
labour. As doctors, engineers, teachers, etc., 
spend comparatively more mental energy, it is 
called mental labour. Payment that is done for 
labour is called wages.
3. Capital
Fig 4.4The various equipment and machinery on which 
man invests for the purpose of production are 
capital. Machinery, buildings etc., are considered 
as capital. Payment made with respect to capital 
is called interest.
4. Entrepreneurship
Fig 4.5Production factors are not located in one single 
place. They lie scattered in different places and 
among different individuals. The task of labouring 
to bring together the production factors distributed 
for the expand production process is called  
entrepreneurship. Payment made for this is called 
profits or profit. 
69
for free distributionActivity 4.1 
Name five goods utilized for human needs. Show, in the form of a table the 
production factors used for each such commodity. 
Processes taking place in an economy
                 Various processes take place in an economy. These processes can be 
divided into three main parts
 ² Production
 ² Distribution  
 ²Consumption
1. Production
 Production is the process of the alteration of resources so as to facilitate 
satisfaction of human needs in an economy. The production taking place in an 
economy can be basically divided into three sections;
 ²Agricultural products
Tea, rubber, coconut, paddy and other types
Fig 4.6
 
of grain, vegetables, fruits, meat, fish, 
eggs, etc.
Fig 4.7 ²Industrial  Products
Machinery, motor vehicles, garments, 
stationery, instant food, etc.
70
for free distributionFig 4.8
 ²Services 
 Education, health, postal, 
 telecommunication, 
 electricity, transport, etc.
 Commodities produced can be divided into three sections according to the 
manner in which they are made use of.
Capital goods Intermediate goods   Consumer goods
Capital goods are goods 
utilized directly in the 
production process. 
They are also called 
export goods. Capital 
goods can be used 
again and again in the 
production process.
e.g;    Machinery, 
buildings, vehicles etc.Goods that are utilized 
for the production of a 
particular good are called 
intermediate goods.
Special feature of 
intermediate goods is that 
they cannot be reused.
e.g; Fertilizer used in 
paddy production, timber 
used in the manufacture 
of furniture.Goods and services utilized  
for the wants and needs 
of individuals are called 
consumer goods 
e.g; Food stuff, clothes, 
medicine etc. used daily
2.Distribution
 Distribution is the process of delivering the produced goods to the consumer. 
In the past, since one person produced the goods required by one's own self, there 
was no exchange of goods involved. Afterwards, a system of exchange of one type 
of goods for another type of goods came into being. For example, in the production 
of paddy, one's excess production was given to another and salt, dry fish, clothes 
etc., were received in exchange. At present, goods came to be exchanged, through 
the market with money as the medium. This process is called trade. Trade takes  
place not only in the interior of a country, but also internationally. Trade can be  
divided into two main types.
71
for free distributionFig 4.9
 ²Wholesale Trade
 Wholesale trade is the process by 
which the goods produced are supplied to 
intermediate traders in large stocks, instead 
of the final consumer. Wholesale trade 
takes place between the producer and the 
wholesale trader and the wholesale trader 
and the retail trader.
Fig 4.10
 ²Retail Trade
 Retail trade is the provision of goods 
obtained from the producer or the wholesale 
trader to the consumer. The retail trader is 
the last person met, when goods flow from 
the producer to the customer.
3. Consumption
 Consumption is the fulfillment of human needs and wants using the goods 
and services produced by an economy. The individual who fulfills his needs in this 
manner is called a consumer. The goods that directly contribute to the fulfillment of 
the needs and wants of the individual are called consumer goods. The utilization of 
food, drink, clothes, vehicles in the fulfilment of one's needs, are examples.
Activity
Complete the table below making use of goods and services you know .
Capital goods Intermediate  goods Consumer goods 
72
for free distribution
Exploring information on various economic systems
 An economic system shows how various organizations deal with the solution 
of basic economic problems as to what man faces, to what extent, what manner and 
for whom  it is produced. This is called an economic system.
These economic systems are basically divided into three main parts.
1. Capitalist systems
2. Socialist systems
3. Mixed systems
The capitalist economic system
 An economic organization where property, mostly owned by the private 
sector handled with the intention of profit making is called a capitalist economy 
system. Given below are a few basic qualities of such an economy;
 ²Existence of a competitive market  
 ²Ownership of production factors owned by the private sector
 ² Production being profit oriented  
 ²Unequal distribution of profits
  In capitalist economic systems an effort is made to attract customers to one's 
product and retain them through massive publicity campaigns, is quite evident. 
However, the consumer has the liberty to purchase products of his choice out of the 
goods available in the market.
  Examples of countries where capitalist economic systems prevail are the 
United States of America, Great Britain, Japan and Australia. However, total 
capitalist economic systems cannot be seen in the world, where some properties are 
controlled by the state sector.
Socialist Economic Systems
 Economic organizations in which a central planning board is functioning to 
solve basic economic problems and the property is under common ownership are 
called a Socialist Economic System. Socialist Economic Systems are also called 
planned economic systems or state enterprise economic systems. 
73
for free distribution Given below are a few basic qualities of such an economy;
 ²Property is state – owned  
 ²The economy is handled by a central planning board 
 ²In the solution of basic economic problems, the focus is on the common good
North Korea and Cuba can be cited as examples of countries where socialist 
economic systems exist. It is evident that the existing socialist economic systems 
are undergoing changes.
Mixed Economic Systems 
Mixed economic systems contain the features of both capitalist and socialist 
economic systems. Such economic systems are seen in most of the countries in 
the world. Sri Lanka is also considered a country with a mixed economic system. 
Following are some features of a mixed economic system ' 
 ² Ownership of factors of production devolved on both state and private 
sectors. 
 ²Both the state and private sectors take action in the solution of basic economic 
problems. 
 ²Although the price of commodities depends on the market, there is state 
intervention.
 ² Existence of both private and state sector enterprise '
 ²Intervention of the state in the setting up of welfare activities for the common 
good. 
Activity
 ²Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of Capitalist Economic Systems.
 ²Discuss the characteristics of a mixed economy prevailing in the economy 
of Sri Lanka.
 ²Through this, explain the advantages and disadvantages that the public has 
got.
The concept of  Market Economy
  The Market Economy which operates at present is also called Neo 
– Liberal Economic system. Under this, while the state does not implement what 
the private sector can implement, there is scope for the market to function under 
minimum state intervention.  
74
for free distribution Countries like Russia, Poland, China, where a Socialist Economic system 
prevailed are gradually implementing the concept of Market   Economy at present.
 Given below are several characteristics of the Neo – Liberal Market 
Economy implemented at present.
 ²Privatization of state enterprises 
 ²Provision of facilities for prices to be decided on the market situation
 ²Encouragement of local and foreign private investors
 ²Relaxation of subsidies and price control methods
 ²Toleration of private property ownership
 ²Restriction of state sector intervention in economic matters
 ²Relaxation of market rules and regulations
 ²Minimization of administrative rules, regulations and limitations
 ²Provision on exchange rates to be decided freely and without control
 Adverse features also can be identified within the concept of the market 
economy. Among them is the tendency for the damage caused to other parties, 
in a market economy, to be ignored. This is called negative externalities. Eg: 
Environmental pollution in the location of factories, failure to recognize public 
nuisance etc.
Different forms of the Market Economy 
 When inquiring about countries where a Market Economic System prevails 
three main forms are evident.  
i. Greater evidence of characteristics of a capitalist market.
 e.g( United States of America, Australia, Singapore, South Korea
ii. Greater evidence of characteristics of a socialist market.
 e.g ( North Korea, Cuba
iii. Economies that are in the process of moving towards a transformation 
economy or market economy e.g; Countries like Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, 
Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan 
that belonged to USSR (The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
75
for free distributionBasic characteristics of transformational economies can be identified as 
follows;
Privatization of 
loss bearing state 
enterprisesProvision of 
facilities for private 
property ownership 
Encouragement 
of 
Private enterprisesLiberalization 
of the economy
Activity
 ²Are the basic characteristics of a  market economy evident in Sri Lanka? 
Give reasons. 
 ²List the disadvantages of a market economy.
Influence of Globalization on Sri Lanka
 Sri Lanka is a country with a long history. When examining the economic 
systems that existed from the past to the present day it is clear that Sri Lanka's 
economy existed in various forms. These economic policies changed from time to 
time based on the government that controlled the state. After winning freedom from 
British rule in 1948, it is evident that economic systems with socialist, capitalist and 
mixed economic features, had existed.Characteristics 
of Transformational 
economiecs
76
for free distribution
Current economic system of Sri Lanka and Development
The economic system that prevails in Sri Lanka is based on the open economic 
policy which is a market friendly economy. Even though it possessed features of 
Socialism prior to 1977, at present it contains features of a market economy .
Under the policy of open economy after 1977, private enterprises are 
encouraged through various strategies introduced to the economy.
 ²Provision of various tax concessions to private investors
 ²Removal of trade barriers (customs duty)
 ²Minimization of state intervention in the market
 ²Encouragement of foreign investment
 ²Privatization of state - property
 ²Fluctuation of exchange rates
 ²Introduction of an import export economy
 ² Opening up of state institutions to the competitive market
 ²Broadening infrastructural facilities
 ²Establishment of Free Trade Zones.
It was stated earlier that Sri Lanka too reflects qualities of a Market Economy. 
Given below are a few of such characteristics.
 
Characteristics 
of a 
Market Economy 
System that prevails in 
Sri Lanka
Allowing the value of the currency to float 
in the marketState acting as an encourager of 
entrepreneurs State giving up Exchange ControlRelaxation of barriers regarding foreign 
tradePrivatization of state enterprises State distancing itself from enterprisesEncouragement of the private sector
77
for free distribution
Introduction to Development
 In an economic system, development or growth of various forms can be 
seen. While some are beneficial to man some have an adverse effect. For example, 
growth of crime, an increasing number of accidents, can be shown as adverse 
developments. Accordingly, development that is of a beneficial nature to society is 
described with the term development in Economics.
 Economic growth and development are not the same. Economic growth is 
the percentage of growth in the gross national production annually. But development 
is wider and it implies the growth of economic, political, social and humanistic 
sectors favourable to society.
Some interpretations presented on ‘Development are’:
“Progress in economic, political, social and humanity sectors and 
the minimization of poverty along with permanent progress, is 
development.”
        - United Nations Development Report, 2000 -
“The economic and social transformation process taking place through 
the interaction between complex cultural and environmental factors, 
is development.”
- (www.business dictionary. Com. 2013.08.12) - 
 It is about sustainable development that much of present – day discussion 
is focussed on.  Sustainable development implies ensuring the security of the 
resources of  the economy for future generations while satisfying current needs 
with the passage towards development. 
 It is difficult to give a definite definition to development. This concept 
implies complete personal and social development. In this regard there are several 
aspects that should be taken into consideration.
78
for free distributionSustainable
DevelopmentEconomic 
Development
Personal
Development
Cultural 
DevelopmentSocial 
DevelopmentDEVELOPMENTEthical
Development
In the development of an economy, it is clear, that not only the economic 
development but other sections should also be involved in the process. In this 
instance, what is most important is sustainable development. Sachs, (2004) has 
noted several basic principles that should be considered in sustainable development.
Satisfaction of basic needs
Respecting other culturesBeing consonant with the future 
generation 
Getting public participation  
Conservation of natural resources 
Protecting the environment
Social security 
Matters that need to be 
taken into consideration in 
sustainable  development.
79
for free distributionActivity
 ²List the points that should be taken into consideration in sustainable  
development.
 ² Describe the importance of sustainable development.
 At the millennium assembly of the United Nations Organization in 2000 on 
development, eight Millennium Development Targets were approved.
They are,
1' Eradication of poverty and hunger
2' Acquisition of a common primary education
3' Empowerment of women and gender equality
4' Proportional reduction of infant deaths
5' Development of mental health
6' Suppression of diseases like AIDS and Malaria
7' Assurance of environmental sustainability
8' Initiation of a global relationship for development  
Sri Lanka too has accepted in principle the need to move towards development 
through the achievement of the targets outlined above. It has been accepted as a 
policy at present to make Sri Lanka as the central point of knowledge in Asia
New development trends in present - day Sri Lanka
 
 In the past the economy of Sri Lanka depended on subsistence agriculture. 
But with Sri Lanka coming under British rule its economy was gradually transformed 
into an import - export economy based on plantation crops. Before 1977, state 
contribution in the areas of agriculture, industry and services was visibly dominant. 
Attention was also paid to the setting up of export oriented industries utilizing local 
resources.
 When inquiring into modern development trends in Sri Lanka, it is possible 
to divide the changes that took place after independence into several main stages. 
The table below shows  the special features evident in each period;
80
for free distribution
Special features Stage
 ²Existence of an economic system based on import – export
 ²Both the state and private sectors joining in economic activities 
 ²Plantation industry getting priority
 ²Encouragement of a locally dependent agricultural section
 ²Nationalization of private enterprises (After 1956)
 ²Provision of consumer subsidies 1948-1960
 ²Assumption of a semi – open appearance
 ²Relaxation of exchange regulations
 ²Provision of opportunities to private entrepreneurs
 ²Reduction of food subsidies1961-1970
 ²Becoming a closed economy
 ²Commencement of import oriented industries
 ²Introduction of restrictions on export
 ²Imposition of new regulations regarding distribution of essential 
food items
 ²Implementation of a ration system
 ²Limitation of private land ownership 
 ²Encouragement of a local supply agricultural sector
 ²Making exchange control rules more static and regular     
 ²Development depending mostly on local resources1970-1977
 ²Introduction of open economic policies
 ²Relaxation of export – import limits
 ²Provision of tax relief for foreign investors  
 ²Commencement of export – based industries
 ²Restriction of food subsidies
 ²Preferential treatment for the industrial sector over the agriculture 
sector
 ²Setting up of free trade zones
 ²Implementation of various welfare schemes for the poor
 ²Provision of free uniforms, textbooks, midday meals for education
 ²Privatization of loss – bearing state institutions1978-1993
 ²Implementation of open economy policies, further
 ²Provision of tax relief for private entrepreneurs
 ²Privatization of state enterprises
 ²Involvement of the private sector in the provision of infrastructural 
facilities
 ²Restructuring of state institutions
 ²Obtaining international advice on policy making    1994 - 2004  
  
   
   
   
81
for free distribution After 2004 the implementation of an open economic policy is prominent. 
Nevertheless focus of attention on the agricultural sector and investments were 
evident. Given below are some special features prominent during this stage.
 ² Stop privatization of state institutions. 
 ² Repossession of privatized state institution by the state.   
 e.g - Sri Lankan Air ways, Sevanagala Sugar Company, Paper Corporation,   
      Shell Gas co. (present Litro)  
 ² Taking action for the promotion of the local agro economy. e.g: Fertilizer 
subsidy, Api Vavamu Rata Nagamu programme.
 ² Development of infrastructural facilities. e.g: construction of Highways, 
Harbour, construction of the Airport, revamping the Colombo  Harbour, 
construction of power stations.   
 ² Launching various projects for economic development. e.g: Divineguma, 
Maga Neguma , Gama Neguma, Nagara Alankaranaya, Road Development.
 ² Speeding up urban development
 ² Raising living conditions of the poor. e.g: The Samurdi Programme, 
encouragement of the self – employed, home – garden programmes.  
 ² Popularization of Information Technology. e.g: The Nenasala Programme, 
Vidatha Resource Centers.
 ² Implementation of new changes in the field of education. e.g: Introduction 
of technical subjects to Advanced Level subject stream, establishment of 
professional and technical universities, the thousand school programme, 
establishment of  ‘technical laboratories ’. Fig 4.11      
Colombo Port
 Expressway
82
for free distributionSome of the ongoing development activities in Sri Lanka have the following 
advantages.
Advantages
 ²Rise in employment opportunities
 ²Rise in foreign exchange earnings
 ²Rise in the standard of living of the people
 ²Speeding up of regional development
 ²Maintenance of  high  level of economic 
development
 ²Ability to face world crises
 ²Development of infrastructural facilities
 ²Broadening of new job market
 ²Acquisition of an internationally outstanding 
position
 ²Ability to maintain peace.
Activity
1'   List the various activities implemented in Sri Lanka for development.
2' Explain with examples the benefits that Sri Lanka achieves through 
these projects.
Gradual decrease in the number of families receiving Samurdhi in Sri Lanka
2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 Year
1515613 1541619 1572129 1600786 1631133 1844660 1916594 1960664Number 
of 
families
Several indices on the development of Sri Lanka
2012 2011 2010 2009 Index
9'4 8'5 8'5 10'0 Infant mortality rate
17'4 17'6 17'6 18'4 Birth rate 
92'2 91'9 91'4 91'3 Literacy
92 97 91 102 Percentage of admission for Primary 
Education
92 97 91 102 Position of Sri Lanka according to 
Human Development Index 
83
for free distributionActivity
 ²Using The Central Bank report, prepare rates important to Sri Lanka 
apart from the indices above.
 ² Based on these indices, write a short report about the development of Sri 
Lanka.    
The  influence of technological development and globalization 
on world economy and Sri Lankan economy
Technological progress and globalization
  People who lived in isolation tended to make various discoveries by living 
as a group. With the new industrial revival of Europe new technology too developed 
gradually. Every sector in the world has been connected based on this scientific and 
technological progress. This is called a Global Village or Globalization.
Fig 4.12 - Several modern technological equipment 
 The picture above shows several products that have been created using 
modern technology. It can be seen that the technological equipment are spread across 
all sections of industry, communication, trade, education, health and transport.
 Along with the progress of communication technology that takes place 
in countries of the world, the whole world has drawn closer to each other. Thus 
we can know of any event that occurs anywhere in the world in a moment. The 
world drawing closer in this manner with technology is generally  known as 
globalization.  
84
for free distribution The mutual relationship taking place within the economic, political and 
cultural processes is called globalization. The world economy becoming a single 
unit can also be expressed as Globalization. Thus economic changes of one country 
exert influence on other countries.
Given below are several characteristics of globalization.
 ²Broadening of the world of work
 ²Broadening of the global market
 ²Ability to live in any country in the world
 ²The possibility of working in any country in the world according to one's  
skills and abilities
 ²Transfer of industries to countries where cheap labour is available
 Just as much as economic reasons, political, social and cultural reasons 
too influenced the spread of globalization. Developed countries use this concept 
to politically influence other countries. e.g: Market control, impose sanctions 
etc. Various forms of cultural intermixing take place as a result of globalization. 
Similarly, world powers have utilized globalization to impose their domination in 
the world market. It is also possible that a form of neo – colonialism would spread 
owing to globalization.
Activity
 ²Collect information on globalization.
The influence of globalization on the world economy
International trade has been subject to various changes within globalization. 
The view of the European Union is that the entire world should be transformed into 
a single nation speaking the same language and using the same monetary unit. One 
example of this is the action taken by the European Union to introduce a common 
currency unit within its zone.
As stated earlier the endeavour of world powers was the transformation of the 
entire world to a single economic unit within globalization. Various organizations 
such as the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, United Nations Organization, 
Asian Development Bank and World Trade Organization have been set up to 
promote this effort. However the effort made through these institutions have directly 
or indirectly influenced other countries.
85
for free distributionCharacteristics observed in the world Economy consequent to globalization
Characteristics 
observed in 
the world 
Economy 
due to 
GlobalizationRise of Multinational 
Companies
Investment based on 
factors like tax relief, 
cheap labour, that exist 
in various countries   
Introduction of the open 
economic policy to the 
world
Emergence of various 
regional co operational 
organizations    
Flow of local money to 
foreign countries Occurrence of                      
revolutionary  changes in                
Information technology
Occurrence of barrier-free 
trade through the removal 
of obstacles to trade
Mobility of capital and 
Labour
Implementation of 
economic activities based 
on world production  Projection of one 
country's political 
power to other 
countries by powerful 
countries of the world
Through such influence, world powers not only expect to maximize profits 
but also to establish political stability.
At present the trend of various countries jointly setting up several such 
organizations and their objectives are shown below. 
Objectives Member countries Organization 
 ²Greater systematization of 
financial transaction.
 ²Barrier trade ExpansionAustria, France, Denmark, 
Belgium, Germany, Finland, 
Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Netherlands, Luxemburg, 
Portugal, Spain, Sweden 
Great BritainEuropean Union ^EU&
 ²Free trade United States of America 
Canada, MexicoNorth America Free 
Trade Agreement  
(NAFTA)
 ²Broadening of Regional trade Sri Lanka, India, Myanmar, 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, 
MaldivesSouth Asian Preferential 
Trade Agreement (SAPTA)
86
for free distribution
 ²Broadening of investment 
areas like textiles, garments, 
medicine and information 
technology. 
 ²Encouragement of 
Governmental and non 
governmental organizations.
 ²Technological exchange. 
 ²Ensure regional co-operation.Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, 
Thailand, Sri Lanka, Bhutan, 
NepalBay of Bengal Initiative 
for Multi-Sectoral 
Technical and 
Economic Cooperation 
(BIMSTEC)
Apart from this, the emergence of world economic groups has also occurred 
resulting from globalization. e.g - Birth of organizations like G7, G77, G24, G15 . 
The primary objective of setting up these international economic organizations was 
to take collective action for the resolution of world economic problems and face 
collectively the pressure brought about by developed countries.
Activity
 ²Collect information regarding similar world organizations and prepare 
a booklet.
How globalization influences Sri Lanka
 Sri Lanka too is unable to save itself from Globalization. We have to bear the 
influence of Globalization. As a result of the Open Economic policy implemented 
after 1977 the influence of globalization has become more and more pronounced. 
The reason for this is the exposure of production and trade to the world market.
Given below are several positive and negative influences Sri Lanka has had 
to face on account of globalization.
87
for free distributionPositive Influences 
1' Influx of foreign investments and modern technology
2' Drop in unemployment resulting from the creation of new job opportunities 
in the world of work
3' Higher demand for local product factors
4' Progress of technical and service sectors
5' Birth of local products based on the international market
6' Improvement in the state of the balance of payments
7' Diversification of the economy
8' Production of high quality products (Increase in the Efficiency of production 
and quality of goods)
9' Improvement of local human resources due to influx of foreign experts 
10' Broadening of infrastructural facilities necessary for products
11' Possibility of getting maximum benefits of local resources
12' Regional development due to the location of large-scale industries out of 
the city
13'  The possibility of joining up with various regional organizations
14' Exclusion of inefficient industries from the market
15. Allowing the local consumer to obtain high quality goods
Negative Influences
1' Inability of local products to compete with multinational products
2' Rise in environment damage caused by industrial institutions 
3' Efflux of foreign exchange dividends as interest and loan instalments to 
foreign countries
4' Speeding up of brain drain
5' Escalation of the influence brought on by developed countries
6' Local culture being subject to various questionable influences
7' Proliferation of unsuitable economic and consumer patterns in the country
88
for free distribution8' Need to depend on foreign loans and aid
9' Need to face world economic differences directly.
10' Problems regarding public welfare because of the state sector is distancing 
itself from economic matters
11' Need to agree to donors' conditions when obtaining foreign loans
12' Oppression of the poverty stricken public due to the state distancing itself 
from protectionist strategies such as price control
13' Local resources being subject to exploitation
14'  Destruction of the local dependent economy
15' Destruction of local primary industries
Due to the rapid expansion of globalization it is clear that both its advantages 
as well as its disadvantages have to be faced. It will be possible to minimize the 
influence of its disadvantage by educating the public.
Activity
1' What changes are evident in Sri Lanka, due to globalization?
2' What are the methodologies adopted by Sri Lanka in order to 
minimise the negative influence of globalization?
3' Suggest other forms of action that can be taken for the above 
purpose.
4' Prepare a letter for a wall newspaper on the topic ''The influence of 
globalization on the wellbeing of a multicultural society."
89
For free distributionConflict Resolution in a 
Democratic Society 05
Dispute is a term often heard and often spoken in daily usage. It is 
prevalent in every society. It is the result of diversity. Diversity in human is 
expressed through disputes. Variety of individual aims needs and aspirations 
create conflicts. Diversity is based on language, caste, religion and territories. 
Consequently, conflicts among individuals, individuals and states, states and 
states occur.  
Disputes bring about both destructive and constructive results. In the 
process of social development, conflicts can be taken as a constructive and a 
creative force. For example, an unresolved problem or a series of problems is 
given expression in this manner.
Individual’s mind which leads to conflict
A conflict originates due to dissent in the mind of an individual. As a result, 
the individual is inclined to uncommon behaviour like unrest, tension, sudden 
anger, intolerance, use of harsh language, unruly behaviour or assault. Unless such 
conflicting mental conditions are settled soon and if continued it can end in mental 
illness.
Individuals who evince such behaviour can cause disputes within the family, 
between families, in the society and within institutions. As it is detrimental to the 
individual and society, a solution should be sought at the beginning. Since the 
conflict occurs as a result of the mindset of the individual, the elimination or the 
minimisation of a conflict can bring about mental peace. 
90
For free distribution
Directions to create mental peace
 ²Turn to religious activities
 ²Engage in psychological exercises
 ²Counselling
 ²Through observation of natural environment
Basic reasons for conflicts
The triangular struggle conflicts model of Joban Galtun is useful to study 
about conflicts.
Context
Behaviour        Attitudes     AB
C
 The context here is the background to the conflict. Conflicts occur with the 
connections based on the desires of the relevant parties. Hence the context explains 
the social, economic and political environment responsible for the conflict. 
 Attitudes are the psychological factors on which conflicts develop. It 
is due to true or wrong beliefs of both the parties. Violent conflicts are caused 
by misconceptions among participants. Mental states such as fear, suspicion, 
disappointment and hatred do occur in minds. The final result is the conflict due to 
aggressive attitudes.
Behaviour related to conflicts is multifaced. It can be helpful or forceful.
Forceful behaviour can be aggressive or destructive.
91
For free distribution
Parties involved in conflicts
Within the individual
Among individuals
Among communities
Among countries
Conflicts
Different role models
Reasons for conflicts
Different ideas
Limitations
Mentalities
Disappointments
Occurrence of 
disturbances
Activity
 ²Remind conflict situation faced by you
 ²What are the causes of that conflict?
 ²What are the ill - effects you got out of that?
 ²Discuss the action you would have taken to avoid it.
92
For free distribution
Types of conflicts
Conflicts can be identified by their nature when studying about the types of conflicts. 
According to the following diagram they can be studied broadly under two main 
areas, such as, 
 ² Internal conflicts
 ²International conflicts
Individual’s 
Conflicts   
Conflicts originated due to internal and 
external reasons of an individual
Between two 
individuals 
Conflicts between two persons due to 
different ideas attitudes and differences
Within the     
       family 
Conflicts between husband and wife, 
parents, children due to various reasons
Among groups 
Conflicts caused by differences of opinion 
on communal, religious, caste, and tribal 
differences
Within a state
Rebellion and terrorist activities caused 
 by policies and political opinions
Between two states
Conflicts of  opinion on frontiers, sharing 
resources, and political reasons
Conflicts that occur on political opinion,  
economic, social reasons and power struggleAmong several 
countries 
93
For free distributionInternal Conflicts 
 Personal and social conflicts among the people of a country can be categorised 
as internal conflicts. These can be categorised as universal and intricate conflicts. 
For example, the conflicts which are of national level or wider level can be called 
universal conflicts. The conflicts among communities, religions, and national trade 
unions can be cited as examples. Examples of intricate conflicts are the mental 
conflicts caused in an individual due to disappointment, family conflicts, economic 
problems, domestic violence and land disputes.
 Not only individual level reasons but national level reasons also affect these 
conflicts. It is obvious that individual conflicts cannot be solved without solving 
national level conflicts and vice versa. In solving conflicts, individual and national 
level relations have to be taken into serious consideration.
International Conflicts
Conflicts between countries are called international conflicts. They are of two kinds.
 ² Conflicts of opinions 
 ²Military conflicts
 Political, social and economic differences create differences of opinion and they 
are called conflicts of opinions. The conceptual conflict of capitalist and socialist 
camps, western and eastern cultures and Christian countries of the west and the 
middle eastern Islamic countries can be cited as examples.
 Resources, economic benefits and expansion of powers are the reasons 
behind international conflicts.
 The final outcome of an international conflict is war. This situation is to be 
seen at global and territorial level and between countries. The 1st and 2nd world 
wars were extremely gruesome. Millions of human lives were destroyed and the 
loss of property and environmental damage was terrible.
Fig 5.1 - -- First world war   Fig 5.2 - -- Second world war  
94
For free distributionThough there is no wars of global level, there 
Fig 5.3 -  A part of Gaza Strip  are many wars between several countries. The 
wars between Israel and Palestine, Indo Pakistan, 
the war against Syria, Afghanistan, Libya, 
Turkey by America and the European 
community can be indicated as examples.
Fig 5.4 -  An instance of Libyan war Fig 5.5 -  Dangers of Syrian war
Activity
Collect and present the following information on an ongoing war.
 ²Countries engaged in the war 
 ²Reasons for the escalation of war 
 ²Actions taken to make peace
Roots of Conflicts
Communal feeling, political ideologies, religious ideologies, socio - economic 
problems can be cited as main roots of conflicts.  It is represented by the diagram 
below.
95
For free distributionRoots of conflictsPolitics Ethnicity 
Socio economic condition Religious concepts
   • Caste e.g.  Tribal conflicts between Tutsis and Hutus of 
Rwanda. 
• Tribes
• Physical nature - Apartheid in South  Africa
• Social strataEthnicity
• Frontiers e.g (Israel - Palestine conflict)
• Expansion of power (western capitalists' conflict with 
Russia)Political   
• Poverty (conflict between Somalia and Ethiopia)
• Market (e.g: imposition of economic embargo)
• Resources (conflict in the Middle East)Social economic 
status  
• Sectoral conflicts (Irish war)    
• Between religions (War of the cross) Social economic 
status  
96
For free distributionActivity
 ² Select one root from the above chart and explain it using an example 
from an ongoing war.
 ²Prepare a poster depicting the terror of war and necessity of peace. 
Methods of conflict resolution   
The resentment and contradictory ideas of individuals primarily create 
disputes. Such situations can be settled at the outset, avoiding conflict. For this 
individuals and various parties can follow many methods.
Democratic action can be cited as the best  method in conflict resolution. 
Taking decisions, listening to the voice of both parties is meant by this. This is 
important in the case of an individual, family, nation or international area as well. 
Being insensitive to a conflict of opinion which exists in an individual or 
among a group of people can lead to a dispute. By ensuring a good communication 
with the relevant parties the eruption of violence can be prevented.
Conflict resolution is important because the results of conflicts can be 
unhealthy for the individual as well as society. Conflicts in society appear in different 
shapes and levels. Understanding the present situation of a conflict is of paramount 
importance in conflict resolution. As such, various suitable methods need to be 
studied. The important methods which can be used are discussion, bargaining and 
conciliation, mediation, peaceful settlement, arbitration, inquiry and counselling.
Discussion
The basic methods of conflict resolution is discussion. The parties who were 
instrumental in the conflict find a resolution after coming to a table directly or 
by way of third party discussions. The parties succeed in coming to "win- win" 
situations.
Aspects of discussion
 ² Coming to a settlement by way of discussions 
 ²Personal or confidential environment
 ²Instant solutions 
 ²Minimum cost
 ²Informal structure 
 ² "Win - win" for both parties
97
For free distributionOpportunities where discussion can be utilised
 ²Personal disputes
 ²Family disputes
 ²Property disputes 
 ²Institutional disputes 
 ²Inter - institution disputes 
 ²Disputes within and among countries
Activity
 ² Select an occasional disputable situation in your classroom / school and 
present how you would make use of the discussion method to solve it 
using a role play.
Bargaining and amicable settlement
 This   method   is  in use  to solve democratically the problems that  arise 
between employee and employer. The related parties come to a resolution on their 
demands. In this process the parties demonstrate their opposition whenever they 
disagree. Ultimately both the parties   agree  on certain decisions considering their 
demands and resolve the conflicts. 
 In industrial conflicts, estate labour conflicts, trade unions, discussion 
and bargaining methods are used.
Aspects of bargaining
 ²A team work
 ²Existence of  (employer - employee) both parties
 ²Discussion at the discussion table
 ²Mutual agreement
 ²Formal process
 ²Related to service conditions and wages
 ²Bargaining commences from demands
 ²Bargaining ends in an agreement
98
For free distributionActivity
 ²Explain the special features of bargaining. 
 ² Explain the advantages of settling disputes of employer - employee by 
way of bargaining.
Mediation
 Mediation is used in helping two persons to communicate or two countries 
to settle a dispute when the discussion method has failed. This is a mediation sans 
war. Professional mediators, specialists in conflict resolution, the relevant parties 
of the conflict and external parties can be used as mediators. 
Facts to be considered when selecting a mediator
 ²An unbiased individual accepted by both parties
 ²Who has a thorough knowledge of the conflict
 ²A person who does not force his own decisions and solutions on the parties
 ² Who does not influence either party 
 ²Who directs parties towards a solution acceptable to both parties 
 ²Meets both parties separately in instances where they cannot meet directly 
and communicate between both parties
 ²Directs towards flexible solutions and arrives at win -win solutions
Qualities of a mediator
 ²A good listener 
 ²Fidelity 
 ² Dedication 
 ²Honesty 
 ²Unbiased nature
 ²Moderation
 ²Observation and Creativity
99
For free distributionOpportunities to use mediation
 ² Family disputes (e.g. Domestic violence)
 ² Consumer and trade disputes (e.g. Regarding goods produced below the 
standard)
 ² Disputes between tenants and the house owners. (e.g. Regarding removal of 
tenants)
 ²Employers - employee disputes (e.g. Regarding wages and overtime payments)
 ²Adult boards (e.g. Regarding disputes between old parents and children)
 ²Conflicts between nations
 ²Conflicts among countries
Activity
 ² Mention the particular features of the mediation process.
 ²Explain the uses of mediation in resolving problems. 
 ²Select a conflict situation in your classroom/ school and be a mediator for it.
      Explain what action you have taken.
Conciliation
 Conciliation is the intervention or mediation in a conflict or disagreement. It 
is not the final settlement. Conciliator may be an individual or a group. It is meant 
to settle disputes by discussing with the opposite sides. Conciliation is useful when 
both parties are in neither win nor lose positions. The conciliator may take part to 
settle  the dispute on a request by one of the parties or someone else.
Role of the conciliator
 ²Induce the opposite parties to a discussion
 ²Take the initiative to explain the underlying reasons for the conflict 
 ²Raise a direct or indirect discussion regarding the reasons of the conflict 
 ²Try to reduce the gap and the differences between the opposite parties
 ²Suggest a programme to enter into agreements 
 The Conciliatory Council has been established as a legal entity by the 
Ministry of Justice to conciliate. It directs settlement of conflicting situations, minor 
offences, family disputes before taking them to courts. Many such conciliatory 
councils have been established at regional level.
100
For free distributionOpportunities for using conciliation 
 ²Settlement of family disputes 
 ²Settle labour disputes 
 ²Settle disputes among groups of people
 ²Disputes concerning public property
 ²Settlement of minor offences (insult, warning and damage to property)
Activity
 ² Participate in a session of a conciliatory board in your area. 
 ²Prepare a report after studying the process thoroughly.
Arbitration 
 Arbitration is the process which is useful in settling a dispute by a mediator 
with the consent of the parties. The special person who is selected for the purpose 
is the arbitrator. The arbitrator listens to the problems and questions and finally the 
correct party is explained. Although both parties are supposed to find solutions, the 
outstanding feature is the win - lose situation.
Qualities of an arbitrator
 ²Gives good hearing 
 ²Unbiased stand
 ²Balanced presence
 ² Takes correct decisions
 ²Creativity and observation
 ²Ability to explain clearly and meaningfully
 ²Equity
101
For free distributionChances of using arbitration
 ²Settling industrial disputes 
 ²Disputes of wages and rights 
 ²Employer disputes
 ²Disciplinary inquiries
 ²Disputes over finance
Activity
 ² Act out a role play to portray the settlement of disputes by way of 
arbitration. 
 ²Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of solving disputes through 
arbitration.
Inquiry 
  Inquiry is the traditional method of conflict resolution. A court of law or a 
parallel body advises the relevant parties to the conflict to come to a settlement 
at first and if it fails the dispute is settled by legal inquiry. The verdict of the 
judiciary is final and the loser can appeal to a higher court of law .
Aspects of Inquiry
 ²Both parties cannot refrain from  
  coming to the discussion
 ²The defendant should appear in 
court
 ²Giving evidence, legal inquiry is 
formal 
 ²Both parties have freedom to give 
evidence, argue and cross examine 
 ²Verdict is given according to the law
 ²The court decision is final and both 
parties are bound by it
 ²Ability to appeal
 ²The loser should pay the costs of litigationFig 5.6 - -Aluthkade Courts 
Complex

102
For free distributionActivity
 ² Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of the legal process in 
conflict resolution. 
 ²Participate in a court of law to observe the process of solving disputes in 
your area.
Building a compromise
 Both parties of the conflict are brought to a compromise by a third party in 
this process. Both parties sign an agreement to certify the settlement of the dispute 
and control instances of conflicts. The particular feature is the contribution of a 
third party to observe the implementation of the agreement.
Chances of settling disputes by compromise 
 ²Family disputes
 ²Employer - Employee disputes 
 ²Disputes with neighbours
 ²Disputes between institutions 
 ²Disputes among peers 
Counselling 
 Counselling is the facilitation and direction given by a third party to settle 
the conflicts between two parties or among individuals. Here, directing the parties 
for alternative settlements, making them aware of the consequences and directing 
them to mitigate the conflicts are done.
Qualities a citizen should possess in settling disputes 
 There are a lot of qualities to be developed personally and socially to 
overcome the challenges aimed at a person, facing disputes is one such challenge. 
The following qualities given in the chart should be developed. 
103
For free distribution
Self awareness Kindness and 
ClemencyPatience Creative thinking
Happiness
Sensitivity Personal traits
 Effective 
communicationEffective decision 
taking 
Endurance  Innocence
Respect other's 
    opinionFulfilment of 
duties Justice
Tolerate victory 
and defeat
GenerosityInter - personal 
relationsEmpathy
Listening Respect others Social traits a 
person should have      
Activity
 ²Breath well with your eyes closed for a moment
 ²Recollect the best qualities within you
 ²Be happy about them
 ²Draw a creative picture about the qualities within you and exhibit it
104
For free distribution ² Advantages of peaceful resolution of conflicts
Preventing loss of life
Prosperity of the country
National Integrity
Preventing loss of resources and property
Protection of fundamental and human rights
Reduction of mental tension
Enhancement of personal mentality 
Protection of self - respect
Protection of peace and security 
Political stability
Economic stability
According to the above chart, conflict brings personal and social deterioration.
Therefore, avoidance of conflicts is vital for the development of people and the 
country. Accordingly, individual peace brings peace to the family and peace in the 
family brings peace to the country which ultimately bring about world peace.
Activity
 ²Propose your own list of suggestions to control the provocative situations 
within you.
 ²Suggest things one could do to prevent disturbance to the others in the 
family, school, and society. 