iGrade 9GEOGRAPHY  
Educational Publications Department
To obtain textbooks in electronic medium
www.edupub.gov.lk
iiFirst Print 2017
Second Print  2018
Third Print  2019
All Rights Reserved
Published by Educational Publications Department
Printed by Nimthara Printers. No. 30/1, Temple Road,
Pattiwila, Gonawala, Kelaniya.ISBN 978-955-25-0166-1
iii
The National Anthem of Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka Matha
Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo MathaSundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana LankaDhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye mathaPiliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo MathaOba we apa vidyaObamaya apa sathyaOba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthiOba apa aloke  Apage anupraneOba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba weNava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran mathaGnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi karaEka mavakage daru kela bevinaY amu yamu vee nopamaPrema vada sema bheda dureradaNamo, Namo MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha
ivwms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjda
tl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd
tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhda
tl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ
ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkS
fj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd
wdkkao iurfldaka
xu jha; kf;fs; ehkhNthk;
xd;Nw ehk; thOk; ,y;yk;ed;Nw clypy; XLk;xd;Nw ek; FUjp epwk;
mjdhy; rNfhjuu; ehkhNthk;
xd;wha; thOk; tsUk; ehk; ed;wha; ,t; ,y;ypdpNyeyNk tho;jy; Ntz;Lkd;Nwh
ahtUk; md;G fUizAld;
xw;Wik rpwf;f tho;e;jpLjy;nghd;Dk; kzpAk; Kj;Jky;y - mJNtahd;W kopahr; nry;tkd;Nwh.
  Mde;j rkuf;Nfhd;
  ftpijapd; ngau;g;G.
v
 
 
 
 
 
Message from the Hon. Minister of Education  
  
 
The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took 
place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid 
development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner 
of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an 
environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career 
opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of  the Sri Lankan 
Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.  
 
This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and 
acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders. 
 Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, 
the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the 
technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I 
believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.  
 It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your 
education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education. 
 
I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured 
citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.   
 
  
 
 Akila Viraj Kariyawasam 
 Minister of Education 
 
Being innovative, changing with right knowledge  
Be a light to the country as well as to the world.  
viForeword 
The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with 
the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experi -
ences.
The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the 
textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.
I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as 
well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you. 
W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,
Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10    
viiMonitoring and Supervision -W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka
Commissioner General Educational Publications Department 
Direction -W.A. Nirmala PiyaseeliCommissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department
Co-ordination -S. Dakshina Kasturiarachchi Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department
-A. M. R. K. Adikari Assistant CommissionerEducational Publications Department
Board of Editors
1. Prof. N.K. Dhangalla 
    (Emeritus Professor)-University of Kelaniya 
2. Prof. S. A. Nortbert -University of Colombo
3. Kusum P. Ranasinha -Visiting Lecturer Ocean University
4. R.P. Peiris 
-Additional Commissioner (Retired)Department of Examinations 
5. M. P. Ranjani Dhanawardhana
-Director, Department of Social SciencesNational Institute of Education
6. S. Karunagaran
-Senior LecturerNational Institute of Education
Boards of Writers
1. N.A. Chithralatha      -ISA, Zonal Education Office, Matara
2. K.K.U. Gunarathna -Teacher Service,
Ga/Polpagoda M.V . Yakkalamulla
3. W.K.P. Dharmawardhana
-Teacher Service St. Peter's M.M.V . Negombo
viii4. Karunasinghe Somadasa -ISA (English), Zonal Education Office 
Matara
5. D.M.J. Bandara -Teacher Service Kuli/Saranath M.V .Kuliyapitiya
6. W.A.A.R. Weragoda
-Teacher Service Girls' High School Kandy
7. Yalini Karunagaran
-Teacher ServiceSt. Clare's College Colombo 06
8. T. Sharamila Dharshini
-Teacher Service K/W/Rajawella Hindu National College Digana
9. S. Ilankovan 
-Teacher Service Bt/KK/Karuwakerny Vigneswara College, Valachchanai
10. T. Sri Sureshkumar
-ADE, Zonal Education Office Matale
Language Editing
1.  H. Dahanayaka -Chief Editor (Retired)
Educational Publications Department
Proof Editing
1. H.P.K. Hettiarachchi -Teacher Service 
Piliyandala Central CollegePiliyandala  
Cover Page
1. R.A. Ureka Dilrukshi -Technical Assistance	
Educational Publications Department
Technical Assistance
1. Abisheka Ranasinghege -Technical Assistance	Educational Publications DepartmentIndex
ix1. The Asian Region
2. Landscape of Sri Lanka
3. Spatial changes of Development in Sri Lanka 
4. Environmental Balance 
5. Reading of 1:50 000 Topographic Maps of  
    Sri Lanka
ix
Index
01
23
67
75
83
x
The aim of this chapter is to learn the important information on 
the Asian Region.1
The Asian Region
2
For free distribution3
For free distributionGeographical location of Asia
Relative Location
The continent of Asia is 
located in the Eastern part of the 
Northern Hemisphere of the Earth. Geographically, it is connected to the continent of Europe. Some of the islands that belong to the Asian continent are located in the Southern hemisphere. (Fig.1.1)
The Asian continent is bounded 
by,
 ²The Arctic ocean on the North
 ²The Pacific ocean on the East
 ²The Indian ocean on the South  
 and,
 ²The continent of Europe on the West.
In a geographical view, the Continent of Europe and Asia are both located 
as one landmass called Eurasia. Ural Mountain Range, River Ural, Caspian Sea, 
Caucasus Mountains, Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Suez Canal and Red Sea are the boundaries that separate Asia from Europe and Africa.
There are many islands that belong to the Asian continent. Japanese islands, 
Indonesian islands, Philippine islands, Sri Lanka and Taiwan are examples for those islands which are larger in extent. Andaman Islands, Nicobar Islands and the Maldives are examples of smaller islands.Fig 1.1 - Geographical location of Asia

3
For free distributionAbsolute Location
	 The	location	of	any	place	or	region	on	the	Earth	can	definitely	be	shown	
using geographical coordinates. Accordingly, the absolute location of the Asian region can be shown on the basis of longitudes and latitudes as follows;
The Asian continent is located between 100 Latitude South
to 800 Latitude North and between 250 and 1800 Longitudes
East.
Uniqueness of the Asian region
	 There	are	many	specific	physical	and	human	characteristics	in	the	Asian	
region. 
 ²The largest continent in the world
 ²Presence of all the climatic types of the world
 ²Presence	of	different	human	races,	ethnic	groups	and	languages	and	cultural diversity
 ²Birth place of many major religions
 ²Location of the largest mountain ranges and the highest mountain peak
 ²The most popular continentSeveral unique 
physical and human 
characteristics 
 
 The Asian continent covers an area of 44.6 million km2 (44,579,000 km2). 
It is about 30% of the land area of the earth and 8.7 % of the entire surface of the Earth.              
Source : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia 2017.02.05
 The largest mountain range in the world, the Himalayas, is located in the 
continent of Asia. Mount Everest, the highest peak which is 8848 meters in height 
is located here. The Dead Sea is also located in the Asian land mass, is below the sea level. Cherrapunji in the state of Meghalaya in India receives the highest rainfall and Gobi desert is considered as the area that receives the lowest rainfall in the world. Both areas are located in the continent of Asia.
4
For free distribution5
For free distributionAll types of climates that exist in the world can be found here. Therefore, 
every type of forest in the world also can be found in the continent of Asia. Therefore, 
biodiversity which means the diversity of plants and animals is greater in this region.
According to the size of population, more than half or about 60% of the 
world population lives in the Asian region. It is notable that China and India, the two most populous countries in the world are located in Asia. Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Japan that belong to the top ten countries with the highest population of the world are also located in the Asian region. Accordingly, six out of 10 most populous countries are located in the continent of Asia.
The average density of population of the continent of Asia is 87 per 
kilometer, but there are some regions in Asia with a high population density of more than 3000 people per kilometer. In the Asian region, there are 54 States or independent countries. 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia 2017.02.05)
The diversity in the culture, ethnicity and race is a special feature of the 
population	of	the	Asian	region.	Existence	of	various	languages	is	another	specific	characteristic as various ethnic groups are living there. According to ethnologue, that providing information on languages in the world, 297 living languages are 
available only in China. 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia 2017.02.05)  
Asian region has become unique as it is the home to the world’s most ancient 
civilizations such as Mesapothemia, Howang-Ho, and Indus. It is the birth place 
of major religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Christianity. At present, people who follow religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Christianity live in this continent.
1. State the geographical boundaries that would indicate the relative location of 
the Asian region.
2. Mark those boundaries on an outline map of the world and shade the continent of Asia.
3. Prepare	a	list	of	factors	that	cause	for	the	Asia	to	be	considered	as	specific	region of the world.
4. With reference to a political divisions map of Asia, show the countries that 
belong to it.Activities

5
For free distributionPhysical landscape in Asia
Relief
	 The	 most	 specific	
topographic feature in the Asian region is the Mountain Range of Himalaya. This mountain range spreads 2500 kilometers and stretches in a land area of 6.12,000 square kilometers. Due 
to this large mountain range, India is seen to be separated from Asia and as a result, India is called a sub continent. There are many peaks including Everest located on this mountain range, exceeding 7000 meters in altitude.
Table 1.1 - Highest Peaks in the Himalaya mountain range
Highest peaks Height in meters
Everest 8848
Kanchenjunga 8586
Makalu 8462
Dhaulagiri 8167
Manaslu 8156
Nanga parbat 8126
Annapurna 8091
Nanda devi 7817
   Source : https://en.wikipedia.org/
The other large mountain ranges located in Asia are Altai, Kunlun, 
Karakorum, Tangshan, Ghats, Sargros and Urals.
Several large plateaus in the world are also located in Asia. Some of them 
are Tibet, Pamir, Deccan, Central Siberian and Iran plateaus. Tibet plateau is the 
one that located at the highest elevation in the world. It is located at 5000 meters of altitude and surrounded by the mountain ranges like Himalayas, Karakoram and Pamir. As it is the highest plateau in the world and spread over a very large land 
area, it is called 'Rooftop of the world'.
Fig 1.2  -  Mount Everest - The highest peak in 
Himalaya mountain range
6
For free distribution7
For free distributionNorth Asia is a large plain. It is known as the Western Siberian Plain. 
Manchurian plain and the Great Chinese plain are the other large plains located in 
Asia. Apart from that, large plains are located close to the river valleys of Indus, Ganges and Hwang Ho.
Drainage
The large number of river systems scattered all over the Asian region is 
the	major	characteristic	 of	the	drainage.	 These	rivers	flow	into	different	 oceans	
and seas.
 ²Ob, Y enisey and Lena to the Arctic Ocean,
 ²Amur,	Hwang	Ho	and	Yangtze	to	the	Pacific	Ocean,
 ²Ganges, Indus, Brahmaputra, Mekong, Irrawaddy and Salvin to the IndianOcean,
 ²Euphrates	and	Tigris	flow	into	the	Persian	bay.
There	are	several	rivers	flowing	in	to	the	internal	seas.
 ²Serdaria and Amudaria to the Aral sea,
 ²Ural flows	into	the	Caspian	Sea.
Fig  1.4 - River Ganges - India     Fig 1.3 - River Hwang Ho (Yellow River)  
China
7
For free distribution
Map  1.1 - Physical landscape in Asia   
Source : Gunasena Phyliphs World Map book 2016
8
For free distribution9
For free distribution       Table 1.2 - Major rivers in Asia 
River Length (km)
Yangtze 6301
Hwang Ho 5464
Mekong 4909
Lena 4400
Yenisei 4088
Ob 3650
Indus 2900
Brahmaputra 2897
Ganges 2510           
Compare the length of the rivers in 
Asia with the length and width of 
Sri Lanka.
There are several large lakes located in Asia. Among them Baikal and 
Balkhash are major lakes. Lake Baikal is considered as the deepest lake with fresh 
water located in the world.
1. Mention four major mountain ranges located in the Asian continent.
2. Name	five	peaks	with	their	height	located	on	the	Himalaya	 mountain	 range.
3. Write down the largest rivers located in Asia and write the oceans or seas into 
which	they	flow.
4. Name two large plateaus, one plain and two lakes located in the Asian continent.Activities
Assignment
Mark and name all the physical features written above in an outline map of 
Asia.
Map 1.2 - Size of Sri Lanka
9
For free distributionClimate
The Earth is divided into three main climatic zones according to the 
variations of the distribution of temperature towards the South Pole and towards 
the North Pole from the equator.
 ²Tropical zone (Warm climate)
 ²Temperate zone (Mild climate)
 ²Frigid zone (Cold climate) (Refer to the Map 1.3)
The Asian continent spreads over to the North Pole from the equator. 
Therefore, all types of climate that belong to those three climatic zones are found there.
 ²Tropical zone (Warm climate)
Very high temperature prevails throughout the whole year. The average 
temperature is more than 180C. Therefore, a warm climatic condition prevails here.
 ²Temperate zone (Mild climate)
The average temperature in this zone is lower than the tropical zone. 
Seasonal variations exist here due to the increase and decrease of temperature from time to time throughout the whole year. A clear warm season and cold season is seen here.
 ²Frigid zone (Cold climate)
The main feature that can be seen here is the falling snow and land being 
covered with snow for a longer period of the year due to the lower level of temperature.
Map 1.3 - Distribution of the main climatic zones in Asia
Arctic Circle N.  66.5o
Antarctic Circle S. 66.5oTropic of Cancer N. 23.5o
Tropic of Capricorn S. 23.5oTemperate zone
Temperate zoneTropical ZoneTropical ZoneFrigid Zone
Equator 0oN
  
  
10
For free distribution11
For free distributionIn	these	three	climatic	zones,	several	types	of	sub	climates	with	different	
features	are	be	seen	due	to	the	influence	of	various	factors,	such	as	changes	of	the	
rainfall,	influence	of	monsoons	and	oceans,	altitude,	location	of	mountain	rangesand continents.
These types of climates and the areas they are distributed are included in the table 
below;
The types of climate that exist in the Asian continent
Climatic zone Climatic type Distribution Areas/countries
TropicalTropical rainy climate Java and Sumatra islands
Tropical monsoon 
climateIndia, Sri Lanka, Myanmar
Tropical savanna climate North and northeast India, 
Bangladesh
Warm desert climate India, Thar Desert, Middle
Est Countries
Temperate Warm temperate climate Areas surrounding the 
Mediterranean Sea
Wet temperate climate East China, Japanese islands
Frigid Polar and Tundra climate Siberian region and the Northern 
parts of Asia
Mountain climate Regions surrounding the mountain 
range of the Himalaya
Existence of places with very extreme climatic conditions in Asia is a 
special characteristic
² The lowest temperature in Asia is recorded from the small city of 
Verkhoyansk located in Russia and its temperature decreases up to -50 0C 
during certain days .
² The highest temperature in Asia is recorded from Jacobabad in Pakistan and  
it is about 55 0C.
11
For free distributionNatural vegetation and wild life
Natural	 vegetation	 changes	 regionally	 according	 to	 the	 differences	 of	
rainfall and temperature. Accordingly, the natural vegetation and the wild life have 
adapted to the climatic type. 
Tropical zone –Tropical Rain Forests 
Tropical evergreen forests can be seen in the areas where high temperature 
and heavy rainfall is experienced throughout the whole year. In these forests, there are various tall trees like Mahogany, Ebony, Rosewood, Kaluwara, Bamboo, Sandalwood,	Akeshia	are	available.	The	forests	consist	of	different	layers.	Various	types of creepers, moss, lichen as well as epiphytes grow abundantly here. There is 
also great bio-diversity. 
Species	of	monkeys,	reptiles,	snakes,	fish	species	and	chameleon	species	
are abundantly seen here. Animal species such as tiger, leopard, pig, jackal, deer, 
and sambar live in large numbers in these areas.
Figure 1.5 - Tropical rain forests and the wild life
12
For free distribution13
For free distributionTemperate zone - Temperate Deciduous Forests
Deciduous Forests are grown in the temperate zone as a result of the 
existence of cold and warm seasons during the year. A special characteristic in these 
forests is falling of leaves from trees annually. Oak, Mulberry, Chestnut, Pine, Eucalyptus,	Douglas	fir	are	specific	trees	grown	in	these	forests.	Kinds	of	animals	living here are Wolf, Bear, Sambar deer, and Antelope. 
Frigid zone - Coniferous forests
The	specific	characteristic	 of	this	climatic	zone	with	Taiga	and	Tundra	climate	
is the prevalence of a longer cold season. Coniferous forests are situated in this region. 
The trees are in a shape of a cone so as to resist snowfall. Leaves are in a shape of needles.	The	species	of	trees	grown	here	are	pine,	spruce,	fir,	oak	and	larch.
Reindeer, Polar bear, Snow fox, Snow dog, Sable, and Mink are animal 
species that can be seen here.
Fig 1.6 - Temperate zone forests and animal species
13
For free distributionFig.  1.7 - Frigid zone forests and animal species  
1. T able three major climatic zones that are seen in the continent of Asia and the 
types of climate in each of the climatic zones.
2. Write down the types of natural vegetation spread out in each of the climatic 
zones.
3. Name the animal and plant species grown in each of the natural vegetation zones you mentioned above.Activities
Human landscape of the Asian region
Ancient human civilizations
Several ancient civilizations had been established close to river valleys in the 
world according to the information found at present about human history. Among 
them, Euphrates and Tigris, Hwang Ho, Indus and Nile river valley civilizations are major ones. It is special that except Nile river valley civilization, all the other three are located in the continent of Asia.
14
For free distribution15
For free distribution	 River	Indus	flows	across	present	Pakistan	and	India	and	falls	into	the	Arabian	
Sea close to the city of Karachchi. A developed urban civilization established on the basis of the two ancient cities of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa close to this river valley.
A developed civilization emerged centralizing Anyang city in the river 
valley	of	Hwang	Ho	or	Yellow	river	that	flows	across	China.
The Mesopotamian civilization is the other river valley civilization that was 
located in the continent of Asia. There are evidences that this civilization had been established	between	the	doab	of	two	rivers,	of	Euphrates	and	Tigris	that	flow	across	present Iraq.
Systematic town planning, buildings, creation of monuments, agriculture 
and	production	of	artistic	items	were	specific	features	that	developed	in	these	civilizations.
Types of human races
	 In	the	Asian	region,	different	human	races	as	well	as	many	ethnic	groups	live according to various climatic conditions. Mainly, two types of human races live in the Asian region and the countries where they live are mentioned below; 
Mongoloid       Caucasoid
 ²China
 ²Japan
 ²Malaysia
 ²Korea
 ²Singapore ²India
 ²Afghanistan
 ²Pakistan
 ²Sri Lanka
 ²Arabian countries
15
For free distributionPopulation distribution
The present population in Asia is 4.46 billion (4460 million) ( world 
populationview.com/continents/asia-population 2017.02.01) Out of this, more 
than half is distributed in China and India.
This population is unevenly distributed among countries and it varies 
from region to region. Physical factors have impacted this unequal distribution of 
population. Relief features, climate, drainage and soil are such physical factors.
When considering the population in Asia, a higher population density can 
be found close to the river valleys in South, Southeast and East Asian countries. (Over 500 per km2)
 ²Indo-Gangatic plain in North India.
 ²Irrawaddy river valley in Myanmar.
 ²Hwang Ho river valley in China are given as examples.
	 Central	Asia,	Mongolia,	Northern	flat	lands	Gobi	and	Thar	deserts	are	sparsely populated areas in Asia.(1.4 map)   
Source : worldpopulationreview.com/continents/asia-population - 2017.02.01 ²China            1370 millions
 ²India             1299 millions
 ²Indonesia      255  millions
 ²Pakistan        192  millions
 ²Bangladesh   159  millions
 ²Japan            127 millions
 ²Philippine     103  millions
 ²Vietnam        92  millions
 ²Iran               79   millions
 ²Turkey          78  millions ²Maldives        345000
 ²Brunei            421000
 ²Macao           641000
 ²Bhutan           760000
 ²Timor            1.24 millions
 ²Bahrain          1.78 millions
 ²Qatar             2.11 millions
 ²Armenia        3 millions
 ²Mongolia       3.02 millions
 ²Georgia          3.73 millions Ten countries with a higher density 
of po pulation by 2017                                                    Ten countries with low population 
by 2017
16
For free distribution17
For free distribution
Map  1.4 -  Population distribution in AsiaPopulation Density
population per 1 km2
Tokyo
Beijing
Bangkok
JakartaMumbai
Indian OceanPacific 
OceanTehranover 500
100-50025-10010-251-10less than 1
1. State	four	factors	that	influenced	the	unequal	distribution	of	population	in	
Asia.
2. Name	five	high	populated	countries,	five	less	populated	countries	and	five	high populated cities located in Asia.
3. Mark	the	five	high	populated	countries	and	cities	located	in	Asia	you	stated	above in a world map.Activities
Economic activities
Various economic activities can be found in the countries located in the 
Asian region. In this region, economy of the countries is based on agriculture, 
industry and service.
17
For free distributionHere,	the	attention	is	paid	to	three	countries	which	are	significant	for	each	of	the	
sectors.
 ²Agriculture              -    Pakistan
 ²Industries             -    Japan
 ²Service activities     -    Dubai
Pakistan as an agricultural country in Asia 
 Agriculture is the main 
economic activity in Pakistan. 
25.9% of the Gross Domestic Product   in  Pakistan  is contributed from the agricultural sector. Out of the total labour force, 43% is engaged in agricultural activities. 25% of the land area of the country has been used for agricultural activities.
 Pakistan is important 
as a major country in the 
world that provides raw cotton. Among the other agricultural products in Pakistan, wheat, rice, sugarcane, mangoes, chick pea, vegetables, milk and dairy products, beef, mutton and eggs are important.
 Pakistan is also 
important as a country with the 
largest irrigation systems in the world. Water is provided for about 16 millions hectares in the country through the Indus river valley irrigation system.
Figure 1.8 - Agricultural activities in Pakistan
18
For free distribution19
For free distributionThere are two main 
agricultural seasons in Pakistan and 
they	are	known	as	Khariff	and	Rabi.
According to the ranking 
system of the World Food and 
Agriculture Organization, Pakistan has achieved following  places as a 
food producer to the world market.
Table 1.4 - Place achieved by Pakistan in providing Agricultural Products to the world 
Market
Type of the 
productPlace in the 
world market
Chick pea 3
Apricot 6
Cotton 4
Sugarcane 5
Rice 4
Mango 4
Source - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agriculture_in_Pakistan//Rankings 21/2/2017Type of the 
productPlace in the 
world market
Dairy products   5
Date palm   5
Onion   7
wheat   7
Types of oranges   6
Accordingly,	Pakistan	has	earned	a	significant	place	as	an	exporter	of	
agricultural products in the world.
Japan as an industrial country
Japan is a major industrial country in Asia as well as in the world. According 
to the Per capita Gross National Product, Japan is the country that possess the third 
largest economy in the world. In Japan, 27.5% of the Gross National Product is contributed by the industrial sector. Out of the labour force, 25.2% is engaged in the industrial	sector.	A	specific	feature	in	Japan	is	maintaining	industries	on	the	basis	of	the import of mineral resources and raw materials completely.
Among the manufacturing industries in Japan, manufacturing automobiles, 
electronic equipment, machinery, iron and steel, ship-building, chemicals, textiles, computer and computer accessories, robotics technology, pharmaceuticals and processed foods are important.Crop 
seasonDuration Crops grown
Khariff From April to 
Octobercotton, paddy, 
millet, maize 
and sugarcane
Rabi From November 
to Marchwheat, barley 
and oatsTable 1.3 - Two crop seasons, duration and the 
crops grown in Pakistan
19
For free distribution	 Manufacturing	automobiles	is	the	key	field	of	industry	in	Japan.	Japan	has	
won the sixth place out of the top ten largest automobile manufacturers in the world. Japanese automobiles are in the forefront in the world due to factors of high quality, durability, fuel economy, comfort and inclusion of very modern components and equipment. There are several major automobile manufacturing companies in Japan and some foremost ones are mentioned below.
 ²Toyota  
 ²Mitsubishi  ²Nissan 
 ²Honda  ² Suzuki
 ² Isuzu ²Mazda
 ²Subaru ²Daihatsu
 ²Hino
 
 Honda, Yamaha, Suzuki and Kawasaki are major motor cycle producting 
companies in Japan in the world.  
 Japan has achieved a rapid development in producing various types of 
electronic and electrical equipment. For these productions, the companies of Sony, Mitsubishi, Electric, Panasonic, Cannon, Fujitsu, Nikon, Yamaha, Sharp, Nec, Hitachi and Casio are important.
	 Production	of	plastic,	polystyrene	and	polypropylene	are	significant	as	main	
petro chemical industries in Japan. The other frontline production industry of Japan is producing computers and computer accessories. Among these companies Nec, Fjitzu,	Epson	and	I.B.M	are	significant.
Fig.1.9  -  Industrial activities in Japan
20
For free distribution21
For free distribution
20
For free distribution
Japan has achieved its development with regard to Gene Technology which 
is	considered	a	very	important	field	at	present	in	the	world.	Gene	Technology	is	
used in various sections such as agriculture, livestock farming, pharmaceuticals, chemicals and food processing.
Japan is in the forefront among the countries where that utilizes nuclear 
power in abundance, in the world.
Dubai as a service center
The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven states known as Emirates. 
Out of them Dubai is a small Emirate state.
The total population of Dubai is 2,502,715 and the population density is 
644.2 per km2. Accordingly, Dubai is a highly populated country. Dubai known as 
global city is important as the business hub of middle east.
The base of the economy of Dubai is the production of mineral oil. The large 
amount	of	wealth	earned	from	this	resource	has	been	invested	in	other	fields	in	that	
country. Dubai has been developed as a service center as its physical environment is not suitable for agricultural purposes.
Among major economic sectors in Dubai, the highest percentage value 
sector is the service sector. This represents around 37.2% out of the total Gross Domestic Product in Dubai. Out of the total employees, 33.0% is engaged in employment related to the service sector. (Emirates NDB Research-Dubai’s service sector overview-18 March 2015)
There are many service industries carried out by Dubai as a service center;
 ²An aviation center of modern crossroads connecting East and West. Accordingly, 
Dubai is important as an intermediate transit center in the world.
 ²Importance of Port Jabil Ali as the major Middle Eastern export center as well as free trade harbour.
 ²Center for Tourist attractions and tourist services providing center.
 ²As a center of providing international communication services Eg – CNN, Al Jazeera
21
For free distribution ²As a center that provides an indoor stadium and day and night cricket stadium for 
cricket and tennis at international level.
 ²Establishment of the largest trade center called Dubai Mall.
1. State four factors why Pakistan is important as a major agricultural country in Asia.
2. Write down the two main agricultural seasons in Pakistan and write the types of crops grown in each of the season.
3. State	five	major	agricultural	 export	products	in	Pakistan	
4. State four reasons to show how Japan has become a major industrial country in Asia.
5. State the major industrial products in Japan
6. State	which	reasons	have	influenced	 the	importance	 of	Dubai	as	a	service	
center in Asia.Activities
References
 ²History, Grade 6 (1996), Educational Publications Department
 ²Geography, Grade 10 (2011), Educational Publications Department
 ²Physical Geography, G.C.E. (A/L) (2015), Educational Publications  
Department
 ²Geography Information Magazine (1996 - January 6 V olume) Sri Lanka
 ²Geographists Association
 ²Gunasena - Phyliphs World map book (2006), M.D. Gunasena and company, Colombo
 ²https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia//
 ²http://www.worldatlas.com
 ²http://www.worldpopulationreview.com
22
For free distributionPB
For free distributionGlossary
• Relative location --  idfmalaI msysàu - \õº¦ Aø©Âh® 
• Absolute location - ksrfmalaI msysàu - uÛ Aø©Âh®
• Geographical coordinates -  N+f.da,Sh LKavdxl --- ¦Â°¯À BmTÖ
• Bio diversity -  ffcj úúO;ajh - E°º¨£ÀÁøPø©  
• Population density -  ck >k;ajh - -\ÚöuõøP Ahºzv
• Tropical zone - ksj¾;k l,dmh - -A¯ÚÁ»¯®   
• Temperate zone - fi!uH l,dmh -- CøhöÁ¨£ Á»¯®
• Polar zone - O%ej l,dmh - -•øÚÄ Á»¯®
• Tropical rainy climate - ksj¾;k
     j¾Id foaY.=Kh - A¯Ú ©øÇU Põ»{ø»
• Tropical monsoon climate - ksj¾;k     fudaiï foaY.=Kh -- A¯Ú £¸ÁUPõØÖ 
Põ»{ø»
• Tropical savanna climate - ksj¾;k      iejkd foaY.=Kh -- 
A¯Ú \ÁßÚõ 
Põ»{ø»
• Hot desert climate - WIaK ldka;dr foaY.=Kh - -öÁ¨£¨ £õø»ÁÚ 
Põ»{ø»
• Warm temperate climate - WKqiqï fi!uH foaY.=Kh - -CÍg`hõÚ Cøh
öÁ¨£  Põ»{ø»
• Wet temperate climate - f;;a fi!uH foaY.=Kh  - -CøhöÁ¨£ DµU 
  Põ»{ø»
• Polar and tundra climate - O%ej yd ;=kaød foaY.=Kh - -•øÚÄ ©ØÖ® x¢vµõ  
   Põ»{ø»  
• Highland climate - Wiaìï foaY.=Kh - E¯º{»U Põ»{ø» 
• Tropical rain forests - ksj¾;k j¾Id jkdka;r - A¯Ú ©øÇU PõkPÒ
• Deciduous forestes - m;kYS, jkdka;r     - -Cø»²vº PõkPÒ
• Coniferous forests - fla;=Or jkdka;r - F]°ø»U PõkPÒ 
  ö£Ø÷ÓõÀ Cµ\õ¯Ú
• Petro chemical industry - fmfg%d ridhk l¾udka; - øPzöuõÈÀ ö©õzu 
  EÒ|õmk
• Gross Domestic Product - o< foaYSh ksIamdÈ;h - EØ£zv  
• Tourist attractions - ixpdrl wdl¾IK - _ØÖ»õ PÁºa]PÒ  
2
Landscape of  
Sri Lanka
  Relief, drainage, climate and natural vegetation are the 
main components of the physical landscape. The human 
landscape is created by man through his activities on the 
basis of this physical background. The main objective of 
this chapter is to study the inter-relation between physical 
and human landscapes of Sri Lanka.
24
For free distributionPhysical Landscape
 Sri Lanka is an island with a beautiful landscape located in the Indian Ocean. 
The island consists of mountains, plains, rivers, waterfalls, beaches and various 
types of vegetation as well as buildings, roads, tanks, industries and croplands built by man on this physical environment.  
Relief
 The land of Sri Lanka consists of complex physical features as a result of 
geo-activities that occurred during a long period in the geo history. Among them, a salient feature is the central mountains located in the center of the country and the plain that extends towards the coastal belt from there. The island can be divided into three zones on the basis of relief. Identify it by studying Map 2.1 
Point Pedro
Jaffna
Mannar
Intermediate plain
Central hillsAnuradhapura
Mihintale
Ritigala
Yapahuwa
Knuckles 
Pidurutalagala
Namunukula
KataragamaWelimada Plateau
Horton Plains KirigalpottaSamanala Kanda
(Adams Peak)Ginigathena Colombo
Dondra HeadGalagedara
Kandy 
PlateauDimbulagala 
BatticaloaTrincomaleeCoastal plainN
Map 2.1 - Relief map of Sri Lanka21
3    Coastal plain
    Up to 30 m from the 
sea level1
     Intermediate plain
     From 30 m to 300 m2
   Central mountains
   Over 300 m3   
24
For free distribution25
For free distributionCoastal Plain
The region from sea level up to the 30m contour line along the coast belongs 
to the coastal plain. In the South in certain places, the coastal plain is about 3 km 
narrow and in the North it is about 32 km wide. The coastal plain consists of various relief features. The lower areas of river valleys and the river mouth regions belong to this. The coastal plain has several special features such as flat land, points, lagoons, sand dunes as well as the features like braided rivers, marshy lands and deltas.
Fig 2.1 - Coastal plain 
Marshes - Marshes are formed when the sediments brought by rivers are 
deposited as sand banks and blocking the estuaries or water remaining in lowlands 
due to overflowing of rivers. Examples of marshes are Muthurajawela, Bundala, Kalametiya, Somawathiya, Anawilundawa and Kirala kele. 
Bays - A bay has a wider opening of the sea protruding towards the land filled with 
saline water. Many such bays are located along side the coastal line in Sri Lanka. Some of them are Koddiyar Bay, Arugam Bay and Weligama Bay.
26
For free distributionLagoons - A lagoon is a lengthy 
stretch of an area filled with brackish 
water, separated from the sea by sand bars which have narrow outlets to the sea only during a certain period of the year. Negombo, Jaffna, Puttlam, Chillaw and Batticaloa are examples.
Points or Headlands  -  A land area 
with hard stone that protrudes towards sea is called a point. Dondra head, Fowl Point, Sangamankanda Point and Point Pedro are examples.
Islands - Small land areas completely 
covered with water are called islands.  
Sea Cliffs  - A sea cliff is a land area 
composed of hard rocks standing at an 
edge of the coast with a steep slope. Trincomallee, Kirinda and Rumassala are examples.
Delta - Delta is a land area formed with the deposit of sediments carried by a river 
close to river mouths with a shape of a triangle. Deltas can be seen close to the river 
mouths of Mahaweli Ganga, Mee oya and Kala oya.
There are attractive places located close to the coastal line. Blow hole is 
such a feature. This name has been given as a result of splashing water up through a cave making a sound.
Intermediate plain
The intermediate plain is 30-300 m in altitude. According to the Map 2.1, the 
plain is wider in the North and becomes narrower towards the South. The features that can be mostly seen are contour hedges, residual hills, rivers, flood plains and plains. 
Fig 2.2 - Blow hole at Kudawella
26
For free distribution27
For free distributionParallel 
mountains
Residual hillsRakwana Mountains and Bulutota hills that extend 
North - West to South - East directions
Residual hills are the remains of hard mountains 
which had been subjected to erosion. Kataragama, 
Mihintale, Sigiriya, Ritigala and Govindahela are 
examples. 
  
There are many rivers flowing across the intermediate plain. Specific features 
located in between the m are plains, flood plains and undulated lands.
Central Hills
The areas over 300 m belong to this zone. This is indicated in No. 3 of Map 
2.2. This region is more complex than the other two relief zones.
    
Map 2.2 – The Central Hills2 134
28
For free distributionThere are four principal mountain ranges in the Central Hills with higher peaks;
1. Samanala Mountain Range
2. Namunukula Mountain Range3.Pidurutalagal Kirigalpotta Mountain Range
4. Knuckles Mountain Range (Map 2.2)
Plateaus - A plateau is an area of flat land at a high elevation. There are five Plateaus 
in the Central Hills. (Map 2.2)
 ²Kandy Plateau
 ²Hatton Plateau
 ²Welimada Plateau
 ²Mahawelatenna Plateau
 ²Koslanda Plateau
Gaps or Passes  -  A pass is a low area located between two mountains. Haputale, 
Balana, Galagedara and Ginigathhena are examples.
Waterfalls  - The plateaus which are located in the central hills are of different 
heights and rivers flow across steep slopes or escarpments forming waterfalls. Bambarakanda, Dunhinda, Luxapana, Diyaluma and Ramboda are examples.
Drainage
Sri Lanka which is rich in water resources contains main 103 river valleys. 
Out of them, 34 rivers starting from hill country, flow in different directions in an aerial pattern. These rivers are known as  permanent rivers  since they are 
abundant with water through out the year. Some rivers that are starting from undulated lands in dry zone, flow during rainy season and become dry during dry season. These are known as seasonal rivers.
Details of a few major rivers in Sri Lanka are stated in Map 2.3 and Table 2.1
28
For free distribution29
For free distributionMap 2.3 - A few main rivers of Sri Lanka
N
30
For free distributionTable 2.1 – Details of a few major rivers in Sri Lanka 
River  Length km  Catchment area (km2)
1. Mahaweli Ganga
2. Malwatu Oya 3. Kala Oya4. Kelani Ganga5. Yan Oya6. Deduru Oya7. Walawe Ganga
8. Kalu Ganga33516414814514214213812910,327
 3246 2772 2278 1520 2616 2442 2688
80% of the rivers  located in Sri Lanka flow across the dry zone. Mahaweli 
is the longest river as well and has the largest river basin. Out of the total land area 
in Sri Lanka 1/6 belongs to this.
When we consider the total drainage pattern, Sri Lanka has a radial pattern. 
However, various drainage patterns are formed when tributaries are added to main rivers. Among them, Dendritic and Trellis drainage patterns are important. When we compare River Mahaweli with kalu Ganga, Kelani Ganga and Gin Ganga, they flow through a shorter area and the catchment area is also smaller. During the rainy 
seasons floods occur in abundance close to these rivers .  
Activities
1. Mention the difference between relief and landscape.
   I' Complete the following table in association with the characteristics and  
         examples of main relief zones in Sri Lanka.
Coastal plan Intermediate plain Central mountains
1
23412341234
30
For free distribution31
For free distribution
  II' Mark the following in a model of Sri Lanka map
 ² Jaffna lagoon
 ² Ritigala
 ² Dondra head 
 ² Point Pedro 
 ² Mannar islands 
 ² Delft ² Knuckles mountain range
 ² Sigiriya
 ² Katharagama mountain 
 ² Govinda hela
 ² Batticaloa
 ²Puttalam lagoon ² Mahaweli river
 ² Kelani river
 ² Malwathu oya
 ² Walawe river
 ² Menik river
 ²Piduruthalagala  
    mountain
Climate 
Sri Lanka is an island located close to the equator. Specific characteristic 
of the climate in Sri Lanka is the high temperature and the rainfall distributed 
throughout the year.
Weather is the state of 
atmosphere that prevails 
within a short period of time 
at any place.Climate of a particular place 
is the general condition of the 
atmosphere which is determined 
by analysing and concluding on 
weather for a long time.
32
For free distributionTemperature
Average annual temperature in Sri Lanka is 270C. Yet there are small 
regional variations. Map 2.4 clearly shows this.
Map  2.4 - Distribution of Annual Temperature of Sri Lanka

32
For free distribution33
For free distributionSeveral factors influence the variation of temperature in Sri Lanka.
 ²Proximity to the Indian subcontinent
 ²Altitude (height of land)
 ²Distance from the sea
 ²Changing wind pattern
According to the Map 2.4, the Northern part of Sri Lanka has a high 
temperature while Eastern, Southern and South-Western low lands experience low 
temperature. The reason for high temperature in the Northern part of Sri Lanka is its proximity to the Indian sub continent . Areas like Jaffna, Anuradhapura and 
Mannar are subjected to high temperature when temperature increases in India.
When you go to Kandy, Nuwaraeliya or Sri pada you would feel that the 
temperature is very low in these areas. The reason for this is the decrease of temperature according to altitude. (Table 2.2)
The decrease of the temperature according to altitude is called the lapse 
rate.
Although Sri Lanka has a high temperature due to its location close to 
the equator, the temperature decreases as it is surrounded by the ocean. But high temperature prevails in the regions of the interior plains in the country due to the low influence of the ocean.
Seasonal winds also influence the decrease of temperature in Sri Lanka. The 
temperature becomes balanced  according to the seasonal monsoons and cyclones.Kandy
        Nuwaraeliya
Piduruthalagala      Height (m)   temperature
447
188224.4 0C
15.4 0C
11.5 0C 2524Table 2.2 - Decrease of temperature according to the altitude
34
For free distributionRainfall
Rainfall is the total quantity of rain received at a place within a 
specified period of time.
Map 2.5 indicates 
the annual rainfall in Sri 
Lanka. Accordingly, a clear feature shown by this map is the regional change of rainfall. Also it can be clearly seen that there is less rainfall is received in the Northern, Eastern and the South-Eastern parts of Sri Lanka while central mountains receive more rainfall. Sri Lanka receives rain in three ways.
1. Convectional rain
2. Monsoon rain
3. Cyclonic  rain
Convectional rain
Since Sri Lanka is 
situated close to the equator, convectional process occurs throughout the year. However this process is subdued in certain periods due to the process of 
 Map 2.5 - Annual rainfall in Sri Lanka
N
34
For free distribution35
For free distributionmonsoons and cyclones. When monsoons and cyclones are over, convectional 
process re-appears. According to that, the convectional rain is experience in Sri Lanka prominently during two periods.
1. The first inter monsoon period is between the months of March and April.
2. The second  inter monsoon period is between the months of October and 
November
As Sri Lanka is situated close to the equator, it has a high temperature 
throughout the year. During the months of April and September, the sun is overhead in Sri Lanka and the air near the surface of the earth gets heated and begins to rise. They are called convectional air currents. The air that has risen up, gets cooled and the water vapour is condensed to form clouds and bring rain thereafter. Here, a special feature is that the rainfalls in the evenings. During the morning period a clear sky is visible and more heat is received. In the afternoon, the sky is covered by clouds and it brings rain in the evenings. These are known as convectional rain, thunder showers or evening showers. 
Monsoon rain
Monsoon is a specific type of winds that blow during a definite time period 
of a year across the land. Monsoon means blowing during a particular time period only. Sri Lanka receives monsoon rain during two time periods namely.
1. The South West monsoon   (From May to September)
2. The North East monsoon    (From December to February)
South West Monsoon rain
The wind that blows across the Indian Ocean towards Sri Lanka from the 
South West includes much water vapour. When these winds with water vapour 
reach the Central Hills and rise up, they bring heavy rains to the Western and South Western parts of the country. The Eastern and the Northern areas located in the leeward areas of the central hills do not receive rain from these winds because they blow as dry winds. These dry winds are called ‘kachchan’ in the areas of Batticaloa.
36
For free distributionMap 2.6 - South-West Monsoon rainfall
North East Monsoon rain
As the North  East Monsoon winds blow in the direction of North-East it 
is called North-East Monsoon. Water vapour carried by these monsoonal winds is 
very low as they blow across a small water area of the Bay of Bengal from India. Therefore, much rainfall is not received as during South-West Monsoon. More rainfall is received in the North falls in Eastern parts of Sri Lanka. 
36
For free distribution37
For free distributionMap 2.7 – North East Monsoon rainfall  
Cyclones
Cyclones that affect Sri Lanka mostly occur in the area of the Bay of Bengal. 
Cyclones mostly occur in the months of November and December. But, cyclones 
may occur at any time of the year. More areas in the North and East receive rainfall from cyclones. These cyclones enter the island from the Eastern coast of Sri Lanka and pass over the South Eastern coast. Whenever there are cyclones a large area throughout Sri Lanka receives rain. Cyclones may occur during the period of monsoonal winds. On such occasions, heavy rainfall is experienced and floods occur. Strength of these winds is introduced as whirlwinds, depressions or storms.
38
For free distribution
Activities
1. Define weather and climate.
2. Name three factors that influence the distribution of temperature in Sri 
Lanka.
3. Complete the following table with reference to rainfall in Sri Lanka.
Method of rainfall Duration Areas receiving rainfall
Assignment
Collect pictures and diagrams about disastrous conditions related to rainfall in Sri Lanka and prepare a wall-paper article.
Climatic zones of Sri Lanka
An area where similar climatic features are seen is identified as a climatic 
zone. According to the factors such as temperature and rainfall, Sri Lanka can be divided into five climatic zones.
1. Low country wet zone
2. Low country dry zone
3.   Hill country wet zone
        5.   Semi-arid zone4.    Hill country dry zone
38
For free distribution39
For free distribution
                 Map   2.8 - Climatic zones in Sri LankaN
Low country wet zone
 ²The areas of the South Western flat lands of Sri Lanka belong to this zone.
 ²The average annual rainfall in this area is 2000 mm.
 ²The average annual temperature is about 270C.
 ²Though this area receives rain throughout the year, South West Monsoon 
period is the main rainy season that prevails from May to September.
40
For free distribution ²The months of February and March are dry to some extent, but there is
 almost no definite dry season.
Low country dry zone
 ²The areas of the North and Eastern flat lands of Sri Lanka belong to this
 zone.
 ²The average annual rainfall is between 1250 mm-2000 mm.
 ²Presence of a dry and wet period of time.
 ²During the period of December to February, this area receives rain from the 
North-East Monsoon. During this period cyclones too may bring rain.
 ²During some periods, rain is impermanent. High evaporation prevails.
Hill country wet zone
 ²The western part of this is formed when a line joining the cities of 
 Matale, Kandy, Nuwaraeliya and Haputale of the Central Hills is drown.
 ²This area receives rain throughout the year.
 ²The average annual rainfall is about 3000 mm.
 ²Maliboda,Watawala and Kenilwerth that receive the highest rainfall in Sri 
 Lanka are located in this zone.
 ²Dry winds occur from December to February.
Hill country dry zone
 ²The Eastern part of the hill country belongs to this zone.
 ²The average annual rainfall is between 1750 mm-2000 mm.
 ²More rain is received from the North East monsoon, but this area does not 
 receive rain from the South West Monsoon as a result of the location being on the leeward side. 
 ²Dry winds occur during a long period of the year.
40
For free distribution41
For free distributionSemi-arid zone
 ²This area is consisted of Mannar and the surrounding areas located in the
 North Western part as well as in Hambantota area located in the South Western 
 part of Sri Lanka.
 ²The average annual rainfall is between 650 mm - 1250 mm.
 ²Rainfall is less and it is limited to 3 or 4 months.
 ²Convectional rains are in operation.
 ²Evaporation is high.
Natural vegetation in Sri Lanka
Trees, plants and creepers that grow without the intervention of man are 
defined as natural vegetation. The factors that influence the growth of natural 
vegetation are temperature, rainfall and soil. Vegetation of Sri Lanka is classified mainly on the basis of the factors of temperature and rainfall. Accordingly, there are seven vegetation zones identified in Sri Lanka.
1. Tropical wet forests
2. Dry Mixed Ever Green Forests 
3. Intermediate Ever green Forests  
4. Hill Country Wet zone Forests 
5.   Hill Country Dry zone Forests (Patanas)
6. Thorny bushes and scrub lands
7. Mangroves
42
For free distribution
Point Pedro
Elephant Pass
Kilinochchi
MullativuJaffna
Mannar
Vavuniya
Medawachchiya
Anuradhapura
Puttalam
Chilaw
Gamapaha
Hanwella
RatnapuraHattonNuwara Eliya
Badulla
MonaragalaAmparaBatticaloaPolonnaruwaTrincomalee
WatawalaKandyMatale   Dambulla
Kurunegala
Colombo
Kalutara
Galle
MataraHambantota
Map 2.9 - Natural vegetation zones in Sri LankaNTropical wet forests
Hill country wet zone forests
Low country dry mixed 
evergreen 
Mountainous dry zone 
forests (patanas)
Intermediate evergreen forests
Thorny and scrub lands
Mangroves
42
For free distribution43
For free distributionAreas distributed / expanded                                                                           Main trees
Western and South Western parts of  
Sri Lanka       
² Sinharaja    ² Hora
² Morapitiya      ²Milla
 ²Kithul    ² Kanneliya    ²Keena
² Bambarabotuwa      ²Midella
 ²Nedun  ² Dediyagala     ²Na
² Nakiyadeniya ²Godapara
Features of vegetation
 ²Height of the trees is between 30-40 meters.
 ²There are several layers.
 ²Trees grow throughout the year.
 ²Colour of the trees is dark green.
 ²There is a canopy formed at the top and there is no light inside the forest.
 ²Plants growth is dense.
 ²Under growth is abundant. There are plenty of creepers, ferns, lichens and  
 orchids here.
 ²Higher bio diversity.Tropical wet forests (Wet evergreen forests/ Tropical rain forests)
Figure 2.3 - Tropical wet forests

44
For free distribution
Figure 2.4 - Dry Mixed evergreen forests Main Areas of Distribution Trees
These forests are distributed throughout 
the low country dry zone.          
² Somawathiya  ² Satinwood
² Wasgomuwa ²Teak
 ²Milla² Wilpattu      ²Ebony
² Flood p lains of r iver Mahaweli                                                                      
² Yala                                       ²Suriyamara
 ²Palu² Maduru oya   ²Margosa
² Udawalawa  ²Weera
Features of vegetation
 ²Height of the trees is between 20 m -30 m.
 ²Trees grow during the rainy season and growth rate is less during the dry 
season.
 ²Bushes of 2 m - 3 m in height could be seen.
 ²They do not grow densely and there are tall trees at intervals.
 ²The forests are light green in colour and there are hardwood trees.Dry mixed evergreen forests
44
For free distribution45
For free distribution     Areas of distribution Main trees
These forests can be seen in the 
transitional zone that separates the wet zone and dry zone.           
² Kurunegala       ² Jak
 ² Sapu² Badulla        ² Pihimbiya
² Matale    ² Lunumidella
² Tangalle    ² Mahogany
Features of vegetation
 ²These forests have trees that grow in the wet and dry zones as it changes 
to the dry zone from the wet zone.
 ²The trees that grow in wet and dry zones are mixed.
 ²Height of the trees is 10 m - 25 m.Intermediate Evergreen Forests
Figure 2.5 - Intermediate evergreen forests
46
For free distribution Areas of Distribution  Main trees
They are found in areas over 1200 m in 
the Western slops of the Central hills.        
² Samanalakanda  ² Walsapu
 ²Beraliya
 ²Hulanheek² Pidurutalagala    ²Keena
² Knuckles  ²Mihiriya
² Horton plain                                                                   ²Dawata
 ²Mora
Features of the vegetation
 ²Average height of the trees is 8 m - 10 m.
 ²With the increase in the altitude, height of the trees gets reduced gradually.
 ²Trees grow as a canopy. Colourful leaves can be seen.
 ²Epiphytes and undergrowth are in abundance.Hill country wet zone forests
Figure 2.6 -  Hill country wet zone forests
46
For free distribution47
For free distributionAreas of distribution Main trees 
They are found in areas over 1400m in 
the Eastern part of the Central Hills     
² Horton plains                                                                                                                  ²Maharathmal 
 ²Domba² Sandatenna   ²Aralu
² Sitaeliya ²Bulu
² Ambewela 
² Kandapola ²Nelli
 ²Kahata
Features of vegetation
 ²Grasslands are distributed with different types of patanas. (Patana, Talawa,  
 Damana, Villu)
 ²Isolated trees can be seen here and there.
 ²Trees have grown so as to resist the winds. The trees are short and they 
 resist the cold and winds. Trees are twisted by nature. 
 ²These forests are called cloud forests. It is because the canopy is seen as  
 clouds when is seen from above. 
 ²Leaves are small and looks folded.
 ²Trees do not grow well as there is a thin layer of soil.Hill country dry zone forests
Figure 2.7 -  Hill country dry zone forests
48
For free distribution              Areas of Distribution                                                                          Main trees
These forests are distributed in the 
North Western and South Eastern parts of Sri Lanka.                                    
² Areas in the Hambantota 
district.                                           
² Areas in the Mannar district. ²Eraminia
 ²Cactus
 ²Palu 
Features of vegetation
 ²Leaves of the trees are thick, scanty and thorny.
 ²Leaves are small.
 It is because they have adapted to the dry climate.
 ²There are trees that get adapted to resist a long dry period.Thorny bushes and shrub lands
Figure 2.8  - Thorny bushes and shrub lands
48
For free distribution49
For free distribution   Areas of Distribution Main plants                                             
Mangroves are found near estuaries 
and around lagoons in the coastal areas. ²Kirala
 ²Kadol ²Ginpol
 ²Diyakanduru ²Katu Ikili
 ²Wal Anoda
Features of vegetation
 ²Plants have many roots ; Prop roots and stilt roots                   
 ²Roots spread above water. They are known as respiratory roots.
 ²Those plants have adapted to brackish waterMangroves
² Kalametiya
² Bundala
² Muthurajawela
² Anavilundawa
² Trincomalee
Figure 2.9 - Mangroves
50
For free distributionAccording to the facts mentioned above, it is clear that there is a physical 
diversity in Sri Lanka. Even in a small land, this diversity could be seen in relief, 
climate, vegetation and drainage. It is because Sri Lanka is a small island.
In Sri Lanka, there is a climatic condition that one can experience from dry 
climate to cold climate. This scenic beauty can be experienced when one travels 
from Hambantota to Nuwaraeliya. We are able to see the diversity in climate, drainage and vegetation in a few hours. This physical diversity has contributed to the sustainability of the environment as well as to the constant sustainability of man. Physical diversity of Sri Lanka is a tourist attraction to locals and foreigners.
Assignment
Assignment
Plan an educational trip to identify relief, climate and vegetation in Sri Lanka. Prepare a brochure to include the features such as relief, climate vegetation.
Human landscape 
Population of Sri Lanka is 
20.2 million. It increases every 
year. Information on population is obtained from the census conducted by the Department of Population and Census once in ten years.
Distribution of population
Population of Sri Lanka has 
spread unevenly. The Majority of population lives in the wet zone. In comparison, less population is distributed in the dry zone. (Map 2.10) From the total population, Human landscape 
Population and human activities are the main factors affecting in creation 
of human landscape.
Map 2.10 - Distribution of population in Sri 
LankaN
50
For free distribution51
For free distribution¼ is accumulated in the Western Province and the least distribution is shown in 
the Northern Province. The reasons for the increase of population in the vicinity of Colombo are the location of the administrative and the commercial city and the abundance of service facilities such as health, education, transportation and industries in the province. A low population distribution is shown in the districts of Moneragala, Vauniya, Mannar and Mullatiu. The reasons are less physical, infrastructure facilities and unavailability of economic opportunities in these areas. These changes in the population distribution can be shown through the density quantitatively. It is depicted by Map 2.11.
This uneven distribution 
can be explained according to the districts and provinces. These quantitative changes can be shown though population density. According to the population census 2012, density of population was 323 per square kilometre in Sri Lanka. This does not mean that the population is distributed in every region equally. It is clearly indicated in Map 2.11. 
Regional changes of 
population distribution in several selected districts can be identified according to the population density as shown in table 2.3.
Kilinochchi
MulaithivDistrict Margin
PopulationJaffna
Mannar Vavuniya
Anuradhapura
Puttalam
Gampaha
RatnapuraNuwara EliyaBadulla
MoneragalaBatticaloa
AmparaPolonnaruwaTrincomalee
Kandy
KegalleMatale Kurunegala
Colombo
Kalutara
Galle
MataraHambantota
Map 2.11 - Population density according to the districts of 
Sri LankaN
52
For free distributionComposition of Population 
 Composition of the population in 
Sri Lanka can be expressed in various 
ways such as distribution by gender, age, ethnicity and religion.
Distribution by sex
 According to the population census 
2012, out of the total population, 51.5% are females while 48.5% are males. It is 
clear from the data that the percentage of the males is gradually decreasing. This can be clearly expressed by sex ratio. The number of males for 100 females in the population is called the sex ratio. The following table indicates how sex ratio has changed according to the census reports of 1981 and 2012. 
Table 2.4 - Sex ratio in Sri Lanka
Year Sex ratio
1981 104.0
2012                                                    94.3
                               Source: Reports of the census and statistics
Age structure
According to the age structure in Sri Lanka the aging population has 
increased to a certain amount. It is expressed in the following table.  
Table 2.5 -  Population according to age structure
Age  Census %     (1981)Census %      (2012)
Below 14 years
Between 15-59 yearsAbove 60 years    35.2    58.2    06.6    25.3    62.3    12.4
Source : Reports of the census and statisticsDistrict Population 
density
Colombo 3305 km2
Gampaha 1541 km2
Kandy 664 km2
Hambantota 210 km2
Moneragala 72 km2Table 2.3 - Population Density in a few 
districts of Sri Lanka
52
For free distribution53
For free distributionPopulation structure according to the race
According to the races, ethnic structure is shown as given below;
Table 2.6 - Population  structure according 
race Graph 2.1 - Population  structure according 
race 
Race Percentage 
(2012)
Sinhalese 74.9
Sri Lankan Tamils 11.2
Sri Lankan Muslims 9.2
Indian Tamils 4.3
Others 0.5Sinhalese
Sri Lankan Tamils
Indian Tamils
Sri Lankan  Muslims
Others
74.911.24.29.20.5
Population structure according to the religion
Population structure according to the religion is given below; 
Buddhist
HinduHindu
Islam
Roman catholic
Christianity
Others
70.212.69.76.11.3
0.1Table 2.7 - Population structure according 
to the religionGraph 2.2 - Population structure according 
to the religion
 Religion Percentage 
(2012)
Buddhist 70.2
Hindu 12.6
Islam  9.7
Roman catholic  6.1
Christianity  1.3
Others  0.1
Growth of population
The difference between the crude birth rate and the crude death rate is called 
the natural growth of population in a particular country. When it is added to the 
net migration (the difference between in and out migration of the country) it is called the growth of the total population. Graph 2.3 indicates how the population increased in Sri Lanka from 1871 to 2012. 
54
For free distributionGraph 2.3 - Growth of population 1871 - 2012
Settlements
Settlements are established by groups of people to live together with co-operation 
to be protected from enemies and wild animals and to avoid a harsh environment.  
A settlement cannot be considered a mere habitat only. Settlement is a unit 
which consists of various institutions of economic, social and cultural activities 
of man and religious places, buildings, gardens, agricultural lands as well as 
infrastructure facilities.
Settlements can mainly be categorized into three groups.
 ²Urban settlements
 ²Rurban settlements    ²Rural settlements
Rural settlements
The settlements which are based on agriculture and fisheries industry, 
paying more attention on primary economic activities when using resources, are 
called rural settlements. The villages located close to tanks in the dry zone and fishing villages are examples. 
54
For free distribution55
For free distribution
Fig 2.10 - A few rural settlements
Urban settlements 
Urban settlements are areas  
with higher density of population 
concentrated in a limited land area, centred on non agricultural activities. Colombo, Gampaha, Kandy, Jaffna and Matara are examples.
Rurban settlements 
The settlements which have 
both rural and urban features are called rurban settlements. In these areas, rural features disappear and Urban features are being emerged. Urban areas of cities can be cited as examples.
Activities
1. Name the two districts that have the highest and the least population density 
in Sri Lanka.
2. Mention 4 reasons as to what the increment in population in Western province.
3. What are the reasons for the increment of elderly population in Sri Lanka.
4. Mention in short what a settlement is.
Fig.2.11 - Urban settlements
Fig. 2.12 - Rurban settlements 
56
For free distributionEconomic Activities 
Economic activities of Sri Lanka 
can be divided mainly into three sections.
 ²Agricultural sector 
 ²Industrial sector 
 ²Service sector
Agricultural sector
There are various agricultural 
activities seen in Sri Lanka. Examples 
are paddy cultivation, gardening and chena cultivation in the dry zone and also tea, coconut, paddy, rubber and vegetables are cultivated in the wet zone while tea is cultivated in mountainous areas. Fisheries industry and livestock farming too belong to the agricultural sector. For example, fishing industry is carried out in the coastal areas and in inland reservoirs. Livestock farming is done in the areas of Ambewela, Pattipola, Polonnaruwa and Hambantota.
Industrial sector 
Most of the industries in Sri 
Lanka are located in the Western 
Province. There are various types of industries. Among such, main industries are assembling industries, plastic, tyre, textiles, confectionery and handicrafts. The government has also established Industrial Zones in Sitawaka, Polonnaruwa, Ratmalana and Minuwangoda and Free Trade Zones in Biyagama, Katunayaka and Koggala.Agricultural sector
Industrial sector  
Fig 2.13 - Service sector  
56
For free distribution57
For free distributionService sector
Service sector is important for the improvement of living standards of people 
in a country. Service sector includes various services such as education, health, 
transportation, electricity, water supplies, security, sanitary and communications. Contribution of the service sector is increasing with reference to employment in Sri 
Lanka. Service facilities are mostly expanded in urban areas.
Infrastructure facilities  
During the recent times, special attention has been focused to develop the 
infrastructure facilities to promote the living standards facilities of people. Among 
them, building roads, providing electricity and water are major. 
When developing infrastructure facilities, a prominent place has been given 
to the road development and transportation. This field is developing at a rate between 5% - 6% annually. The road system has spread in every region so that there are facilities for anyone to reach any place in the country within a day. In urban areas, although the road system is developed, the congestion is still there. Recent governme nts 
have taken various steps to develop the field of road transportation like;
 ²Widening roads
 ²Building roads in the rural sector
Fig  2.14 - An express way in Sri Lanka  ²Building fly-overs
 ²Building express ways
58
For free distribution
Electricity
Almost all the regions in Sri Lanka have been provided with electricity 
facilities. Electricity is generated from the electricity projects constructed, in 
association with the major rivers of Mahaweli, Kalu, Kelani and Walawe. Hydro electricity and thermal power are major ways of providing electricity in Sri Lanka. In addition, the use of regenerative energy sources like solar power is increasing.
Water
Sri Lanka is a country rich with the water resource. Water sources like 
rivers, streams, wells, ponds, tap water and ground water are used to fulfil the needs of water of the people. Water taken from these sources is used for different simple purposes like cooking, drinking, sanitary needs and also for complex necessities such as agriculture, industry, and generation of electricity. Economic affairs and living needs of people depend on water. 
Water sources which are used to fulfil these needs are getting polluted at 
present. In urban areas, tap water is important for drinking purposes. Wells, ponds and tanks are important in rural areas in this regard. Importance of water sources has been decided depending on particular areas.
Water and electricity are limited resources not only for us but for many 
countries in the world. It is our duty and responsibility to get the maximum use of this resource, without wasting to protect it for the future generations.
Activities
1. Mention three main sections of economic activities in Sri Lanka 
2. Water and electricity should be used sparingly. State three reasons for this.
58
For free distribution59
For free distributionInfluence of physical landscape of Sri Lanka on 
human activities
Physical landscape of Sri Lanka influences human activities decisively. 
There are regional changes in the physical landscape and accordingly, regional 
changes too can be seen in the human landscape.
Coastal plain
Fig 2.15 - Coastal landscape
Several human activities in the coastal plain are indicated in figure 2.15. 
The fisheries industry, coir industry, excavating limestone and the tourist industry have emerged using the physical environment.
60
For free distribution
Activities
1. What are the human activities which are common to the coastal plain 
indicated by the above diagram?
2. What are the other human activities in the coastal plain which are not shown in the diagram?
3. State the physical facilities available in the coastal plain for human activities mentioned by you.
The wet zone
Fig 2.16 - The wet zone landscape
In the wet zone, there is a suitable physical environment for various human 
activities. Various types of cultivation, distribution of high population and a 
developed road system can be seen here. Several human activities which are carried out in the wet zone are indicated in figure 2.16.
60
For free distribution61
For free distribution
Activities
1. What are the human activities shown by the Fig. 2.16? Form a table to 
include them.
2. Name several crops grown in this area.
3. State the physical factors necessary that are affected for growing these crops.
4. Name the services and employment that can be seen in abundance in this area.
5. Mention two factors that caused this area to become high populated.
The dry zone
Fig. 2.17 - Dry zone landscape 
Tank system is an outstanding feature in the dry zone landscape. The tank 
system has been constructed according to the relief and is connected the irrigation system. It is a specific feature in this area.
62
For free distributionPaddy cultivation, chena cultivation, villages established in association 
with  tanks, ancient cities and various types of cultivation too can be seen in the 
dry zone landscape.
Activities
1. According to Fig. 2.17, what are the human activities that can be seen in the 
dry zone?
2. What are the major physical factors that influence the development of paddy cultivation in this zone?
 
Hill country landscape 
Fig. 2.18 - Hill country landscape
A specific relief and climatic condition exist in the hill country landscape 
and the human activities have been adjusted accordingly.
62
For free distribution63
For free distribution
Activities
1. What are the specific human activities in the hill country landscape?
2. State the specific crops grown in this zone.
3. What are the physical factors that influence growing each of the crops?
4. Hill country roads have bends. Why is it?
5. What are the reasons in making roofs with less height and in colour green?
6. What are the factors that influence tourist attractions in the hill country?
7. Why do the people living here use warm clothes?
Jaffna Peninsula
Fig. 2.19 - Jaffna Peninsula  
    
                
There is a specific landscape in the Jaffna Peninsula in the Northern part of 
Sri Lanka. In this zone, limestone is in abundance and the climate is arid. The people 
who live here have developed agriculture using the ground water and the red soil. Several features found in this landscape are indicated in figure 2.19
64
For free distribution
Activities
1. According to the Figure 2.18, what are the human activities found in Jaffna 
Peninsula?
2. What are the methods used by the people in this area to get ground water?
3. What are the specific crops cultivated and industries that can be seen in this area?
4. There are many islands located in the Jaffna region. What are the human activities that have been established in association with them.
5. Write few products related to Palmyrah tree?
Influence of human activities on the physical landscape of Sri 
Lanka 
In the above lesson, we studied that human activities are determined 
according to different types of environments. With the increase of population, the 
uses of physical environment and resources too increase. Accordingly, influences that affect the physical environment too increase. Human activities influence the physical environment in Sri Lanka.
Fig. 2.20  - The influence of human activities on physical landscape of Sri Lanka 

64
For free distribution65
For free distributionStudy the above pictures well and identify several environmental problems related 
to various landscapes in Sri Lanka.
1. Name a few instances where man uses the physical environment in the 
areas of the dry zone.
2. What are the impacts that affect man due to loss of habitats of wild animals?
3. Prepare a list of human activities that destroy physical environment in these areas.Activities
Assignment
1. Prepare a brochure including pictures of human activities that could be 
identified in various landscapes.
2. Name one environmental problem that prevails in your area and explain how human activities have contributed for causing it.
References
 ²Jala Asiriya Rekaganeema, 2015, Sarath Amarasiri
 ²Human Geography I - II, Educational Publications Department
 ²Sri Lanka Central Bank Annual Reports - 2015 
 ²Sri Lanka National Map Collection, School Edition, Sri Lanka, Servay Department
 ²Sarasavi School Map book, Sarasavi Publishing, A. Weerathunga
Glossary
• Landscape -  N+ o¾Ykh - {»z÷uõØÓ®
• Relief -  N+ úIu;dj - uøµz÷uõØÓ®  
• Braided river -  yevm¨ .x.dj - ¤ßÛ¯ BÖ  
• Marsh -  j.=re ìu - \x¨¦  
66
For free distribution• Point -  ;=vqj - •øÚ
• Bay -  fndlal - Shõ 
• Lagoon -  l,mqj - PhÜ÷µ›
• Gap -  lfmd,a, - PnÁõ´
• Radial drainage pattern -  wÍh c,jyk rgdj - BøµÁiPõÀ £õ[S  
•    Dendritic drainage     
 pattern-  YdÇh c,jyk rgdj - ©µ{Pº ÁiPõÀ £õ[S
• Trellised drainage  
  pattern-  cd,dldr c,jyk  
   rgdj- AÔ¯øh¨¦ ÁiPõÀ £õ[S
• Elevation - Wkak;dxYh -  uøµ E¯ºa]   
• Lapse rate - m;k YS>%;dj -  |ÊÄ Ãu®
• Convectional rain - ixjyk j¾Idj -  ÷©ØPõÄøP ©øÇ  
• Monsoon rain - fudaiï j¾Idj -  £¸ÁUPõØÖ ©øÇ  
• Cyclone rain - jdiq,s j¾Idj - `ÓõÁÎ ©øÇ
• Condensation - >kSNjkh - Jk[PÀ  
• Evergreen forests - iodyß; jkdka;r - GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ Põk 
• Mangrove - lfvd,dk - PshÀ  
• Population distribution - ck jHdma;sh - -\Úz öuõøP  
• Population composition - ck ixhq;sh - \ÚzöuõøP ÷\ºUøP
• Sex ratio - mqñ;sß wkqmd;h - £õÀ Ãu®  
• Crude birth rate - o< Wm;a wkqmd;h - ¤Ó¨¦ Ãu®
• Crude death rate - o< urK wkqmd;h - CÓ¨¦ Ãu®
• Rural settlements - .%dóh ckdjdi - Qµõª¯U Si°¸¨¦
• Urban settlements - kd.ßl ckdjdi - |PµU Si°¸¨¦  
• Rurban settlements - .eñ kd.ßl ckdjdi - Qµõ©|Pº Si°¸¨¦  
• Infrastructure facilities - há;, myiqlï - EmPmhø©¨¦ Á\vPÒ
• Water sources - c, uQ,dY% -  }º ‰»õuõµ®
• Environmental Pollution - mßir ¥IKh - `ÇÀ ©õ\øhuÀ 
Development is a continuous process. It differs from 
country to country and from region to region. Different 
indicators are used to measure development. The main 
objectives of this chapter are, identifying the indicators and 
examining the spatial changes of the development in Sri 
Lanka, based on these indicators. Spatial Changes 
of Development in 
Sri Lanka3
68
For free distributionDevelopment
Development is the improvement of the quality of life of people in economic, 
social and cultural aspects. There are many different definitions of Development. 
The UNESCO declaration on development is, 
1978 - UNESCO DeclarationIn a country social development should take place along with 
economic development. Social development should take place 
within sectors encompassing food and nutrients, health, education, 
housing, social security, clothing, leisure and human freedom. 
   
According to this definition, development means, giving a better standard 
of living to the people of a country with improved economic, social and cultural 
standards. The definition of Development changes from time to time. Development changes from region to region and from country to country. There are several indicators to reflect these changes.
Indicators used to measure Development 
Different countries utilise different indicators to measure Development in 
the world. The following indicators are important among them, 
01.
Per capita income 02.
Infant mortality 
rate   03.
Life expectancy
 at birth 04.
Literacy 
Living conditions of people and how it differs from region to region can 
be made clear using these indicators. Such regional changes can be identified as 
spatial changes. 
Per capita income 
The amount of money that is being earned per person in a country in a given 
period is called per caprita income.
69
For free distribution68
For free distributionIt is calculated as given below;
 Total income of t he country      
  
       Midyear population Per Capita Income =
Income of the population of the country can be calculated by this 
indicator. If the per capita income rises in a country, people can have the benefit 
of good living conditions. 
Infant mortality rate
Infant mortality rate is the number of deaths of infants under the age one 
year per 1000 live births. Infant mortality rate of a country reflects the health and medical facilities and level of nutrition level in a country. 
Life expectancy at birth 
Life expectancy is the average time a new born is expected to live. The 
condition of health facilities and their distribution in a country, food and level of nutrition, good health practices, distribution of facilities for sports and leisure of the country can be identified by these indicators.  
Literacy 
Literacy is the ability of reading and writing of individuals above 15 years 
of age. This is calculated as a percentage of the whole population over 15 years old. 
Number of people above 15 years of age who has ability to 
read and write             
The total population over 15 years old x 100     Literacy  =
70
For free distributionLiteracy indicators reflect the distribution of facilities of schools, education 
and poverty.
Spatial variations in Development in Sri Lanka 
Sri Lanka is a developing country but regional differences also can be seen. 
Let us examine these differences according to each indicator. 
Per capita income can be used to understand the uneven distribution of the 
income of people within Sri Lanka regionally. Monthly per capita income in 2009 
in Sri Lanka is about Rs. 36,451. Table 3.1 depicts the regional differences in the country.
Table 3.1 – Per capita income by districts of Sri Lanka - 2009
District Monthly per capita 
income in Rs.District Monthly per capita 
income in Rs.
Colombo 51,070 Kilinochchi No details received
Gampaha 48,870 Batticaloa 22,844
Kalutara 35,780 Ampara 24,721
Kandy 33,063 Tricomalee 24,291
Matale 30,013 Kurunegala 36,922
Nuwara Eliya 31,029 Puttalam 32,918
Galle 31,376 Anuradhapura 37,586
Matara 30,980 Polonnaruwa 31,526
Hambantota 36,879 Badulla 32,313
Jaffna 18,917 Monaragala 22,161
Mannar No details received Ratnapura 41,312
Vavuniya 39,640 Kegalle 29,342
Mulatiu No details received Sri Lanka 36,451
Source : Sri Lanka Human Development Report 2012
It is clear that per capita income differs according to Districts. 
 
71
For free distribution70
For free distributionAccording to World Bank Reports, infant mortality rate was 8.4 in the 
year 2015. Still there are regional differences in infant mortality rate. The table 
3.2 shows the distribution of infant mortality rate according to the districts of Sri Lanka in 2010. 
Table 3.2 - Infant Mortality Rate in the Districts of Sri Lanka - 2010
District Infant Mortality 
Rate - 2010 District Infant Mortality 
Rate - 2010
Colombo 14.1 Mulative No details received
Gampaha 02.7 Batticaloa 25.1
Kalutara 03.3 Ampara 04.5
Kandy 11.1 Tricomalee 02.5
Matale 07.2 Kurunegala 09.7
Nuwara Eliya 14.8 Puttalam 07.0
Galle 09.9 Anuradhapura 10.3
Matara 09.4 Polonnaruwa 04.6
Hambantota  04.3 Badulla 06.2
Jaffna 03.0 Monaragala 03.6
Kilinochchi 00.9 Ratnapura 05.7
Mannar 03.5 Kegalle 05.7
Vavuniya 08.6
Source : Sri Lanka Human Development Report 2012
There are regional differences even in life expectancy. The life expectancy 
of the whole population of Sri Lanka is about 74.2. This differs according to the gender. Life expectancy of women is 78.6 while it is 72 of males. When considering the life expectance rate of different districts, these changes can be clearly understood.
72
For free distributionTable 3.3 - Life Expectancy at birth according to the districts of Sri Lanka - 2002
District Male Female District Male Female
Colombo 61.9 71.9 Badulla 68.9 75.4
Gampaha 71.5 80.4 Kegalle 72.5 80
Kalutara 72.7 80.2 Kilinochchi No details received No details received
Kandy 67.3 75 Batticaloa 66.8 73.8
Matale 70.7 77.5 Ampara 70.3 75.9
Nuwara Eliya 70.8 74.7 Tricomalee 68.5 74.2
Galle 70.5 78.4 Kurunegala 68.9 78
Matara 73.5 80.4 Puttalam 69.1 78.9
Hambantota 76.9 82.3 Anuradhapura 66.5 76.1
Jaffna No details 
receivedNo details 
receivedPolonnaruwa 68.9 77.6
Mannar No details 
receivedNo details 
receivedBadulla 75.2 80.5
Vavuniya No details 
receivedNo details 
receivedMonaragala 72 78.4
Mulatiu No details 
receivedNo details 
receivedRatnapura 73.7 78.7
Source ( Sri Lanka Human Development Report 2012
It is clear that there are differences regionally according to the indicators 
of literary rate. Although Sri Lanka has a higher literacy rate among South Asian 
countries, there are changes in according to various districts. (Graph 3.1)
Graph 3.1 - Proportional Literacy Rate Based on Districts - 2002  
73
For free distribution72
For free distributionLiteracy rate differs according to the urban, rural and estate sectors in Sri 
Lanka. 
         Urban – 94.7 %
Rural – 91.8% 
Estate – 74.3% 
By this, It is clear that the proportional literacy rate is high in urban areas 
where there are more facilities. 
1. Explain what Development is.
2. Name four indicators that are used to measure the level of development. 3. Explain briefly how per capita income, infant mortality rate and literacy 
affect the position of development of a country. Activities 
References
 ²Human Geography I - II Educational Publications Department 
 ²Annual Report of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka - 2015
 ²Protection of water Recourse - 2015 Sarath Amarasiri 
 ²Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2012/2013 - Final Report,   
Department of Census and Statistics
 ²Sri Lanka Human Development Report - 2012
74
For free distributionGlossary
• Development indices -   ixj¾Ok o¾Yl - A¤Â¸zvU SÔPõmiPÒ
• Per capita income -   tAl YS¾I wdodhu - u»õ Á¸©õÚ®  
• Infant mortality rate -   <ore urK wkqmd;h - ]_©µn Ãu®
• Life expectancy at birth -   Wmf;a § wdhq wfmalaIdj - ¤Ó¨¤À B²Ò Gvº£õº¨¦
• Literacy -   idlaIr;dj - GÊzuÔÄ A¤Â¸z 
  v°À Ch®\õº
• Spatial variations in 
development-   ixj¾Okfha 
       wjldYSh fjkialï- ©õØÓ®  
Envi ronmental Balance4
 The objective of this unit is to study the importance of 
maintaining the environmental balance, unfavourable 
effects of the imbalance of the environment and the 
way how the environmental ethics pave the path for the 
sustainable development.
76
For free distributionEnvironmental balance
The surrounding that is created by biotic (living) and abiotic (non-living) 
components is environment. While plants and animals of this environment belong 
to the living part, solar energy, air, water, soil, land forms, rocks etc. belong to the non-living part. These living components maintain mutual relationships with the non-living components in the eco system. The environmental balance depends on this relationship.
Importance of maintaining the environmental balance
All plants and animals living on the earth are called the bio-community. 
Maintenance of the environment where bio-community lives, while protecting the environmental attributes by reacting to the changes that naturally occur is environmental balance.
Interactions occur between  plants and animals. Those living beings maintain 
relationships with the physical environment. The environmentalists consider man too as an essential component of the environment. Similarly the environmental factors too influence the activities of the living beings; activities of living beings too influence the environment. Maintenance of this mutual balance of influence is important for the existence of living beings.
Factors causing the collapse of environment balance
All living beings (plants and animals) including man get their basic needs 
fulfilled from the physical environment. The environment is composed of the components which are linked to each other. A change that occurs in one component, causes to changes in the whole environment.
Man utilizes the physical environment in different ways for the following needs;
 ²To Fulfil the basic needs like food, clothes, costumes and housing
 ²For transport and communication
 ²For trade
When population increases, the needs as well as their complexity too 
increase. Hence due to the use of modern technology and increase of production, 
man has to go a speedier journey, surpassing the environment.
For free distribution77During the period when the traditional agriculture was the main economic 
activity of man, the impact on the environment was minimum. However, after 
the industrial revolution, the impact of man on environment became acute. The damage caused to the environmental balance due to the expansion of agriculture and industries at a rapid speed along with modern technology was immense. The environmental balance began to collapse due to the excessive addition of waste material to the environment and adverse effect on the components of it.  Collapsing of the environmental balance in this manner is termed as environmental imbalance.
Factors that cause environmental imbalance
 ²Excessive utilization of resources
 ²Irregular development processes
 ²Excessive burning of fossil fuel
 ²Use of agro-chemicals ²Deforestation
 ²Reclamation of low lands
 ²Irregular utilization of land
 ²Employment of improper technology
        Figure 5.1 - Factors influencing environmental imbalance  
 
78
For free distributionIt is clear that such processes which are carried out targeting the development 
of a country have damaged the environmental balance. Though development is essential, it must be achieved while protecting the environmental balance with minimum damage to the environment.
1. State three human activities that cause environmental imbalance.
2. State three problems that have emerged due to such human activities in an 
area in your District/ Province.Activities
 Unfavorable effects of collapsing of environmental balance
Unfavorable effects that occur due to the collapse of the environmental 
balance affects the whole environment on the earth. At present, as never before in 
the human history, the earth’s environment has faced a severe crisis. Scientists and environmentalists have warned that if the present environmental damage continues further, around another 200 years, the earth will convert into a condition which is not conducive for man and other living beings to live.
Figure 5.2 - Unfavourable effects of the collapsing of environmental balance
  
Human activities are the root cause for most of these environmental 
problems. All the countries in the world must corporate to find solutions for these problems. 
For free distribution79Human activities that affect the environment
1. Destruction of forests.
 ²Destruction of flora and fauna
 ²Destruction of water  sources 
2.Use of Agro-chemicals.
 ²Destruction of soil and aquatic life
 ²Contamination of water
3. Use of fossil fuel for energy.
 ²Air pollution
 ²Increase of the environmental temperature
4. Improper urbanization.
 ²Adding of waste to environment
 ²Blocking the water ways
5. Improper disposal of waste
 ²Emergence of environmental health hazards
 ²Destruction of natural beauty
6. Experimentation of military weapons (armament)
 ²Atmospheric pollution
 ²Water pollution in oceans
Assignment
1. Prepare a report on an incident relating to collapsing the balance of the world 
environment based on the following titles.
 ² Incident
 ² Date²  Country
 ² Impact
80
For free distributionNecessity of environmental ethics
Favorable habits which are necessary to maintain the environment in a 
desirable manner are called environmental ethics. 
Ethics are bound with personal behaviour. They are accorded to the standard 
rules and regulations, customs and traditions followed by the people in the societies 
where they live. Man has acted inquisitively since he began to deal with the environment. Then, he used to treat natural environment and natural objects which have created in the conducive surrounding for living with devotion and respect. Man who lived then, received knowledge about the environment as he worked basing on beliefs, faiths and religions. Faiths and beliefs like respecting trees and creepers, protecting them, making offerings and beseeching for the protection of the guardian deities of the forest when entering to the forest are linked to the religious and social life. 
Since ancient times, as man considered the environment as essential for 
survival, he began to worship and protect it.
Likewise, man lived with nature in harmony and protected it. It is important 
to identify the necessity of environmental ethics as strategies of environmental conservation, in the journey towards sustainable development. If it is necessary to maintain the environmental balance, we must adjust to the strategies mentioned in environmental ethics. Every religion has highlighted the importance of protecting the environment.
Sustainable Development
The development that is conducted fulfilling the present needs while building 
an environment that ensures the rights of fulfilling the needs of future generations could be termed as sustainable development.
The necessity of having a sustainable development approach in preparing 
development plans, is of paramount importance. In following such an approach, more attention must be focused on environmental ethics as well. The present day development problems prove that in sustainable development both environment and development must be maintained in collaboration. There, the attention must be focused on the ability of the future generations to fulfil their needs. 
For free distribution81Due to the lack of sufficient attention paid to the environment in present 
day, when large scale when development projects are done, there is a danger of 
collapsing the environmental balance.
          Different national level as well as international level procedures have been 
followed to protect the environmental balance.Under the national conservation plan the following procedures have been followed;
 ²Planning of land use
 ²Conservation of wild life and forests
 ²Promotion of agriculture without damaging the forests, water and soil
 ²Coastal conservation
 ²Launching environmental educational programme
 ²Establishment of the Central Environmental Authority
 ²Establishment of the Ministry of Environment
Two Acts have been passed to protect the environmental balance in Sri Lanka
 ²Coastal Conservational Act
 ²National Heritage Forest Act
Procedures that have been taken at international level
 ²Ramzar Convention on the conservation of wet lands
 ²Montreal Convention aiming at the protection of the ozone layer
Under this situation, the concept of sustainable development clarifies the 
guideline about the factors on which utilization of resources must be based on. 
Accordingly, while fulfilling the needs of the present generation, the environment must be secured for the needs of the future generations too.
Activities
1. State a few environmental ethics found in different religions.
82
For free distributionAssignment
Explain how you, as a student of a school can act to minimize the unfavourable 
effects occur due to the breaking down of environmental balance.
References
 ²Physical Environment on earth, H.K.N. Karunarathna
 ²Physical Geography : Part I, Educational Publications Department
 
Glossary
• Environmental balance -  mdßißl ;=,s;;dj - `Ç¼¯À \©{ø»
• Environmental system -  mßir moaO;sh - `Ç¼¯ÀöuõSv
• Components -  ixrpl - TÖ
• Bio system -  ffcj moaO;sh - E°ºz öuõSv
• Modern technology -  kj ;dlaIKh - |ÃÚ öuõÈÝm£®
• Production capacity -  ksIamdok Odß;dj - EØ£zv C¯»ÍÄ
• Environmental imbalance -  mdßißl wix;=,kh - `Ç¼¯À   
  \©{ø»°ßø©
• Fossil fuels -  fmdis, bkaOk - _Ámk G›ö£õ¸Ò
• Environmental ethics -  mßir wdpdr O¾u - `Ç¼¯À  
  JÊUPö|ÔPÒ
• Sustainable development -  ;srir ixj¾Okh - ÷£suS A¤Â¸zv
• Urbanization -  kd.ÍlrKh - |PµõUP®
• Central Environmental
   Authority -  uOHu mßir
     wêldßh - ©zv¯ `ÇÀ AvPõµ  
  \ø£
• Coast Conservation Act    -  fjr< ixrlaIK  
 mk; - Pøµ÷¯õµ¨  
  £õxPõ¨¦a \mh®
• National heritages -  cd;sl Wreu - ÷u]¯ ©µ¦›ø©PÒ
Physical features and human or cultural features of a landscape 
is presented by maps. It is expected to study the physical and 
cultural features presented in the topographic maps of Sri Lanka 
in this unit.Reading of 1:50 000 
Topographic Maps of 
Sri Lanka5
84
For free distribution1:50,000, Topographic maps of Sri Lanka
You have studied the scale, size of a topographic map as well as selected 
physical and cultural features presented in a topographic map in grade eight.
Ninety two  map sheets have been prepared to the scale of 1: 50 000 to show the topographic features of Sri Lanka. The key that consists of conventional signs and symbols shown in the lower margin of the outer border of the map sheet can be used to read physical and cultural features presented in these topographical maps. Identify the convectional signs and symbols shown in the lower margin of the outer border using a 1:50 000 topographic map found in your school.  
So far you have studied that relief features are presented in 1:50 000 
topographic maps by contour lines. Topographic features can be easily identified by understanding the distribution of contour lines.
All things built on the physical environment by the intervention of man are 
called cultural features. 
1
3
4
5
6 7 8 910111213141516 17 18 19 20
2
        Map 5.1 - A segment of a 1:50 000 topographic map
85 84
For free distribution For free distribution
Figure 5.1 - Conventional signs and symbols of 1:50 000 topographic maps
86
For free distribution
Activities
1. Study the key shown in figure 5.1 well.
2. After studying map 5.1 thoroughly, name the physical and cultural features 
used from 1 - 20, according to the numbers separately.
3. Draw these features using conventional colours and symbols.
Physical Features
Several selected physical features found in a 1:50 000 topographic maps are 
shown below.
 ²Plain
 ²Highland
 ²Main river
 ²Tributary
Plain - A plain is a flat area on land. A plain in a map can be identified by the 
widening of the gap among the contour lines. Even in a plain, small higher places are found scattered. Such places can be identified by a spot height. (Figure 5.2)
Highland - Regions located at higher elevation are called highlands. A highland  
can be identified in a topographic map as contour lines that are distributed close to 
each other.
Highland
Figure 5.1- Plain
Plain ²River valley
 ²Island
 ²Point/ Head
 ²BayLet us identify physical and cultural features of 1:50,000 topographic map of 
Sri Lanka by studying a segment of it. 
Map 5.2 - Plain and highland
87 86
For free distribution For free distributionRiver Valley - Elongated low lands located among highlands are called valleys. 
Main rivers and tributaries flow through valleys.
Main river  - Massive water which flows to a lake or to the ocean across an area 
from a highland is know as a main river.Tributary - Small water streams from which water is provided to the main river 
are known as tributary.
 Map 5.3 - River valley
 Figure  5.3 - River valley                        
Various topographic features are found in coastal areas too. Islands, point, 
bay are some of them.
Fig 5.4 - Island, Point and BayKoddiyar BayDondra HeadPigeon Island
Island - Small land areas surrounded by the sea are called islands. Many islands are 
located on the North East coast close to Jaffna peninsula. 
88
For free distributionPoint - Narrow pieces of land that jut out towards the sea are also found in the 
coastal belt. They are known as heads or points.
Bay - The sea area that indents into land is called a bay.
Figure 5.4 - Island, Point and bay
Cultural features 
Several cultural features selected 
from a 1: 50 000 topographic map are used 
for studying. 
 ²District Boundary
 ²Express ways
 ²Main Roads (A and B Grade)
 ²Other Roads (Secondary/ Not  
main)
 ²Railway Lines
 ²Paddy, Tea, Coconut, Rubber and  
Home gardens
 ²Religious Places
 ²School, Hospital, Police, and Post  
OfficeFigure 5.5. - Different cultural features
District
Express way Main Road (A) GradeMain Road (B) Grade
Secondary 
Minor Roads (Jeep & Cart)
Broad Gauge Single (Tracks)Broad Gauge Double Line (Tracks)Post/Sub Post Office
Police Station/CourtBuddhist/Hindu TempleChurch/Mosque
School/HospitalPaddyTeaRubberCoconutOther Plantations/Garden Lands
89 88
For free distribution For free distributionThese cultural features are shown on maps by different colours and symbols.
 	
Map  5.5 - Point Pedro - New Map (2017)
The relationship between physical and cultural features  
 When you read 1: 50 000 topographic maps of Sri Lanka, it is clear that there is a 
relationship between the physical and cultural features. There is a close relationship 
between the physical features such as relief and drainage of a region and cultural features such as housing and settlements, land tenure, irrigation system and road network of that particular area. Physical features have been mostly utilized when the administrative boundaries are determined. 
 ²Settlements are widely distributed in plains. Settlements in mountainous regions 
are distributed in low lands located in between mountain ranges and in valleys. 
 ²The agricultural land use is distributed in accordance with the relief and drainage. This is clear in topographic maps.
 ²Paddy lands are distributed widely in river valleys in flat lands. They are also distributed as narrow belts along the river valleys in hilly areas. 
New map are being printed by the Sri Lanka Survey Department using standard 
symbols and colours. 
Map 5.5 indicates Point Pedro, an extraction of Map no 02, which is completed 
up to now.
Symbols and colours of these new maps have been altered.
90
For free distribution ²Tea cultivation in hilly areas, rubber cultivation on slopes at medium elevation 
and coconut cultivation in coastal regions and suburbs are seen.
 ²It is clear that relief has influenced the construction of tanks and irrigation systems. Tanks have been built damming the rivers by constructing bunds at the place where they flow through the gaps in ridges. Water is supplied through the canals constructed following the gradient of the land.
 ²The physical features have influenced the construction of main roads too. Though the road network runs straightly on flat regions, in a hilly region it runs according to the relief. River valleys and river gaps have been mostly used in road construction.   
 ²When administrative boundaries are decided, it is clear that, they have been based on physical features like rivers and mountain ranges.
Observe the relationship between physical and cultural features using the 
segments of topographical maps provided.
5.6 and 5.7 - Relationship between physical and cultural features
  Answer the questions based on Map 5.8
1. Name three physical features shown in the map 5.82. Name the types of roads which have been mapped out.3. Name three cultivation of crops that can be seen in the region.4. What is the administrative boundary separated by the river?5. Write five sentences indicating the relationship between relief and crop cultivationActivity
91 90
For free distribution For free distribution
Map 5.8 - Segment of 1:50, 000 topographic map
92
For free distribution
Activity 
Across
1. Widely distributed in plains3. A famous plain in Sri Lanka.5. The largest water bodies.7. Row of bushes or small treesDown1. Cultural feature shown in key.2. A method of farming in hilly regions.4. The direction shown in maps 6. The longest river in the world

93 92
For free distribution For free distributionReferences
 ²Physical environment of the earth - H.K.N. Karunarathna
 ²Sri Lanka map collection - School Print - 2nd Edition, Sri Lanka Servay 
Department 
 ²Physical Geography  - Part I - Educational Publications Department
Glossary
• Physical features -  fN!;sl ,laIK - ö£ÍvP A®\[PÒ  
• Cultural features -  ixialD;sl ,laIK - £s£õmk A®\[PÒ  
• Plain    ;eks;,dj - \©öÁÎ    
• Highland -  Wiaìu ---- E¯º{»®  
• Main river -  m%Odk .x.dj - ¤µuõÚ BÖ
• Tributary -  w;= .x.dj  - QøÍ¯õÖ    
• River valley -  .x ksïkh - BØÖ¨ £ÒÍzuõUS
• Island -  ¥m; -- wÄ    
• District boundary -  Èia;%slal udhsu - ©õÁmh GÀø»  
• Expressway -  wêfõ.S ud¾.h - Av÷ÁP ö|kg\ 
  õø»PÒ  
• Highways    -  uydud¾. - ö£¸¢öu¸UPÒ   